NOTE:
Cleaned using Reg101
I removed the random characters, dots, and spacing that were present throughout the initial plain text version.
So far I have attempted to break the text up where the chapters and proemiums appear, but am still encountering issues fully partitioning the text. 
I have caught many of the long "S" characters, but others have slipped; It does not inhibit the comprehension of the text in my view. 
There are a few pages where I do not know how to clean (Lines 75-76 here) this is a list for an image description. It might come down to hand-cleaning.

TEXT BEGIN:

A directory for midwives: or, a guide for women, in their conception, bearing, and suckling their children. The first part contains. 
1. The anatomy of the vessels of generation. 
2. The Formation of the Child in the Womb. 
3. What hinders Conception, and its Remedies. 
4. What furthers Conception. 
5. A Guide for Women in Conception. 
6. Of Miscarriage in Women. 
7. A Guide for Women in their Labour. 
8. A Guide for Women in their Lying-In. 
9. Of nursing children. 

To cure all diseases in women, read the second part of this book. 

By Nicholas Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physick and Astrology. Newly corrected from many gross errors

To the MIDWIVES of England, Nicholas,Culpeper wifheth Success in their Office in this World, and a Crown of Glory in that to come. Worthy Matrons, ,Y 0O U are of the Number of those ,whom.,my foul loveth, and of wIhom; I make daily menticn in my Prayers, and ha- ving (upon fixed ReJolutions) confe- crated the re/l of nm Life to the Service of' ny Country, -in what Knowledge I was brought up in, or have jpent the greatefl part of my Studies about: The moving catfe of whic, vwas a serious Consideration of the notable In- juries offered to Men and WIomen and indeed to the Kingdom in general, by absconding the Rules of Physic from them, either not writing them at all, or to no purpofi, which is so appa rent, that a Man needs not the Eye of a Lynx to fee it, he may read it running, though he is as blind as a Mole, if he hath but half /a much Natural Inflint. What Infuj lerable In-,A 2 jury
jury is it, that Men and Women should be trained up in Juch Ignorance, that wzen they are Sick and have Herbs in their Gardens conducin to their Cure, they are so Hoodwinked, that they know not their Vertues. Is not this to uphold a Company of Lazy Dotlors, most of whose Covetousness outweighs their Wits as much as a Mi/llfone outweighs a Feather ? How they will anf-,erfor it another Day, God knows, Ipity their Con- dition: This world will not last always. The Con- fderation of this, I fay, put me upon it, to write Whyfic in my Mother-Tongue. I thought, andyet I tink I amn not mistaken in my thought, that it were a good, acceptable Work, well plea/ing both to God nd Man, to mploy that talent God bath given me, for the repreffig of this so great, so apparent, so feible an Evil. If I fail, it's in the Power, not in Will; and God acceptetb the Will for the Deed, and so will gody People for Godlineft is aerived from God's likeness, I conceived a few thoughts, aud I hope to bring them to perfest Birth, viz. To lay down some Rules whereby a Man may as well prevent Sickness before it comes, as a Remedy for it when it is cowm. Ad that this may be done Matbodically, for things look befl when they are in Order, because God is the God of Order, I determined to write of the preferation of Man, even from his Conception to his Grave. Wbat now remains, but to bring this De- teminatian into al ? In doing which, I began here and 'having began here, to whom jhould IDedicate it, but to you? ~nd though I confess the Theory,of
of this be requiite, very requisite to all Women, yet to whom doth the Pra&ical Part f it belong, but to your fJces ? If you please to make Experience of my Rules, they are vey plain, and easy enougb; niether are tbey so many, that they will burthen your Brain, nor fl few that they will be ifufficient for your Neceffty. If you make use of them you will find your Work eafJe, and you need net call for the help of a Man-Midwife, which is a Difparageenit, not only to your selves, but al/o to your Profefion. And let me tell you this (and I'll tellyou but the truth ) to your Knowledge, Care, and Skill, is com- mitted both the being and well being of Women in Labour. The Creator of Heaven and Earth, the God of all the World, the greatejf being of all things, commits the Life of every Child of his to your Charge, even from the very first Minute that he allots it to draw its Breath, and at your hands will he have an account of it another Day. Oh! What manner of Woman ought a Midwife to be ! With what Xnowledge, Skill, Care, Indu#ry and Sincerity oight Jhe to perform her Office? Let every honest Woman that takes this Charge upon her, take Care of it; and wbenihe comes to deliver a Woman, let her know, that for that Day or Night's ,Work, Jhe mt/i ano- ther Day give account before Jehovah, the Lord Jelus Christ, and all the Angels.,So soon as you have read this, you will-prefently agree with me, that a Midwife ought to be as quick .fghted as Argus, her wits mul) be in her Head,,A 3 for
far Bccks are at hme. Hippocrates was iever let- teri Jill'd in the Rules of Phfiic than a Midwife ought to be.,To -wind up all in a oi-rd, all tie Affelions that can be in a Woman, ought to be in a Midwife, the fijfi fep to :hicb is to knew your Ignorance in that part cf P1yfck which is tle iafis of jor , aoR. l'hen you know what you wans, then you know what to 'rave; andyou .kno who said, If any want Wil- dom let him alk it of God (not of the College of Physicians, for if they do, they may hap togo w'itbaut their Errand, unless. tey bring Money witb them ) for he gives liberally to all Men, and up- braideth no Man. Mayn of you are antient, but if yo be too Old to learn, you are as much too proud. Gcd speaks nct now by Fd'ce to Men and 1W/omen as formerly he did, but hefpeaks in, and by MIen, and 'tis no part of Wisdom for to flop the Ear agairnf it. Wken Christ Preached in Noah, the Old World. did so, and you ku:w viL-f t cane after. I confess, God bath gicen tme fowe little Sparks of Knewledge, I do not call the: little as they come from Goa, -for such a wordc'would hold forth, if not Blasphemy, yet exiream Ingratitude; but I call them little comparativekj, in refpea of what Ihall /hortly be revealed to the Sons of Men. Tou all know the Day mufi break before the Sun -ijeth, and this I know (asfereye as I know my own Name) if I reveal what I know, this lght shall increase in me aperfec Day. If Ihide it, I ;kno as well what became of that Ser-,vant
vant that wrapped up his Talent in a Napkin, ind buried it in the Ground; and when Ithink what will become of bims, I tremble to think what will becomn of others that do the like.,To conclude: Grave Matrons, Be diligent in your Off.ce, and be as careful as diligent, as -well to pre- vent Evils before they come, as to provide for themn when they are come. So may you exped the Blefing of God upon you and yours, the Lord will build your Hou/es as he did the Midwives of the Hebrews, when Pharoah kept their Bodies in a great Bondage, cs Physicians of ous Times do your underflandings. And when the Days allotted for you to live in this [World are expired, and the time of your Change /hall come, the Lord will provide an Habitation fcr you n t made with Hands, which will never pass away. Tou know whoit was thatpromified, If you be faith- ful to Death you shall have a Crown of Life.,Lastly, Let me intreat the fovour ofyo zall, Tbat if you by your own Experiences find any thing which I have writlen in this Book, notto be according to truth, for I am but a Man, and therefore fubje3 tofailing., fijl judge charitably of me: Charity and HoneRty always walk hand and hand together, and think ill of no Man. zdly, Acquaint me witb them, and they Ihall be both acknowledged and amended. As for y fielf, I desire durirg sy Life, always to remain,,Yours to what I may, or can,,Nich. Culpeper.
THE Efgh Physician enlarged, with there hundred,and sixty Medicines made ofrE,,g.i/ Herbs, -that were not in any Impression until this; being an Altrologo Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; containing a complcat Method of Phyfick whereby a,a may preserve his Body in Health, or cure himself, being d, for three Pence Charge, with such Things s only grow in Englamd, the being mot fit for Eng/ih Bodies, c. by Nich. C~ter, Student in Phyfick and AaroloY, Price a 6d. The Lacdis Dispensatory; or, every Women her own,Physician, treating of the Nature, Causes, and various Symptoms of all the Diseases Infirmities, and Disorders, natural or contated, that most peculiarly affect the fair Scx in all their diffrent Situations of Life ; as Maids, married Women and Widows; with a Variety of pro- per Remedies in Words at length, adapted to each particular Cafe, agreeable to the best modern PraAice. Alio a compleat Index, an Explanation of difficult Terms, and a copious Preface, including a pathetic Addrefi to all falhionable Mothers, in behalf of them- fkves and their tender Offspring. The second Edition, Price, za 6d. An Essay towards a Complete New SXftem ofMidwifry,,Theoretical and Practical. Together with the Difcrip- tions, Caufis, and Methods of Removing, or Relie- ving the Disorders peculiar to Pregnant and Lying-in Women, and New-born Infants. lntcrfperfed with fe- veral New Improvements; Whereby Women may be delivered, in the mos dangerous Cafes, with more Ease Safety, and Expedition, than by any other Method heretofore praaifed: Part of which has been laid before the Royal Society at Lobmb, and the Medical Society at E6 rgghb; after having been perused by many of the most Eminent of their Profession, both in Graw Bri- taui and Ireland; by whom they was greatly approved of. All Drawn up and Illuitrated with Several Curious Observations, and Eighteen Copper-Plates. In 4 Parts.,By JOHN BURTON, M. D.
Of the Vessels dedicated to G EN E, RA T I ON.,

BOOK I. P R OE M I U M. TH E Eternal God, the Creator of all things, having made that wonderful Work of his the frame of this World 'every jot of which Ihew eth forth the infinite Power and Glory of God to the Sons of Men; for God made the tforld to /hnvu his infinite Poqer and Wifdor, and Ie a ill de- Jfro the lWorld to /curv his 7r*,'ice ; and Jhr et pref/me the Wrrld to Jae.u his Mery and Patic;ce to the Sens of Mn ) he afterwards made Man in his own Image, an Ejitome of all that he had made, in such a manner, that whatsoever is to be seen in the World may be found in Man, And he made him Ruler over the Workmanlhip of his Hands, so that there is nothing within the whole Circle of the Creation which God did not make subjet to the induflrious Capacity of Man; but Man being thus happy, made himself a. un- happy by his Fall, that he is loathsome even to himself and others, even at his very Nativity, which is most pathetically described in Eet. 16. 4,5. And as far rly Nativity in the Day thou wnafl Born, tiyf 'vl 'was not cur, eritler 'wal tlbo wnaJbed in Water to ftapple thee; thu er as nt salted at at or fwadled at all. No Eye pitied thee to do any of the/e u . to thee, to have compafion upon thee bat thou 'auaf cal out into the oen field, to the loathing of thy Person in the Day that thon waft Born: And from this original Sin pro- ceed those abominable A&fions which we may daily fee in the World; for by it the underisanding is blinded, the Will perverted, and Conscience mipwreck'd. Alter this the, Lord in pure Mercy to Mankind, sent the Lord Jesus Chr/fi, his only begotten Son, who was equal with the Father, to take our Nature upon him, and thereby unite us again to the,A 5 Deity
Deity, and to satisfy his Juilice to the uttermolt for our Sins, whereby we are again interested in Heaven; what remains then of us to be done more than by confidering the uncertainty of Man's Life. and how many Casualties he is subject to here below, to labour what in us lies to icarch out the fecrcts of Nature whereby we ma>: preJrve our own Lives the more to glorifie our Maker and to communicate that knowledge, which by our industry we have obtained, unto the Sons of Men our Brethren ? Doubtless this was that which moved Silcmctn to make choice of Widoim, ac- counting Riches but dung, and a Kingdom but vanity; neither did he keep close his knowledge to himf-lf (as loo many now a-Days do) but he pubiilhed large Discourses both of Birds and Beats, Herbs andTrees, and of all the Stars of Heaven, however through the Iniquity of the Times they are since lolf. The very fame Principles first moved me to publifli what I knew to the World; and ex- errience witneffeth to me, that the more I reveal that knowledge God hath given me to the World, the more lie fill teacheth me; and being determined within my self, no: to give over till I have finJihed the whole Body of Phy- tc, I begin firt at the Principles. namely, The Anatomy or the Vefle:s dedicated to Generation ; for above all things I hold it most £tting that the Women (efpeciallv Midwives, ihould be well kill'd in the exaa knowledge of the Anatomy of those Parts. Let it not ie objeted to me that many good Mlidwives are ignorant of it: What then, the more is the Pity, ay I; mult not I teach m'y Child a reifon for what it faith, because a Parrot can speak as plain as it without it? A Midwife is ,or else should be) Na- ture's helper; and how can any help Nature, and not be well fk:ll'd in the Tools by which Nature doth her work ? This then is the Business of this Book, viz.. To give you a brief, yet very perfc& Anatomy of those Members which Nature ufeth as Infiruments to beget its like, to which I have added some means how to preserve them clean and pure, the Neglea of which I conceive to be the reason of most Miscarriages in Women, nay, and of the Death of Children in their Infancy: Which being done in all reason, the manner of Nature's forming the Work, and fahionin.,the
the Child in the Womb, is next to ensue, lhall (the LOrd afliling me) in the next place be handled. The !nftruments of Generation are two forts, Male, aid. Fena!e: Their use is the Procreation of Mankind; the Operation is by A/ion and PaJion, the Agent is the S8e, the Patient B.'ood; So that the Body of Man being compo-- fed by Action and PaiTion, he mua needs during his Life be ifbje& to them both. Let no Man obje& to me, that many have written worthily of this subjeCt before; 'tis.very probable, and 'tis true that there is no less reason and understanding required to judge of Scienccs formerly writ- ten, than there is to be the firl Writers of them. I have been as plain as I can, and that satisfies me, and so I hope it will do all honed People. To return to our purpose, that this may be made clear and hon-., and Women know what they have to do, I shall divide this Book into two SeAions.,, i. Gnitals of M EN.,2t . The GeCitas of WOMEN. All te/fe are far more exant/y def-ribedin Veftingius's Adta- tomnt in English, And a/' itn Riolanus's AiNato;y, to'y are O,]l calc.r-y d.ficr'ilEd, ewii/, the Difrafes incidntl to these Parts, id lt e Seat cf /.re Difeajes. And for tre Curre of all 'Deafes, fee Rivcriu5's Pra,? e of PlhJ/ci in English.,They that think the ufl o. these Mcdicinres is two brief ( it's so only tor cheapne:s of the Book ) let them read thife Books of mine. viz. Platezs, Se:;:rtus, PjveriuJ, Riol/Jwus, Barthoi-i;ns, 7JohAOi, Ir2l.-gst, &c.,S-E C T. r, The Genitals f ME N. F Irf for the Genitals of Men (for I hope good Woiaen,will pardon me for serving my own Sex first) some pre- pare Matter to make Seed of, and they are called Vafa Prr- parantia; some elaborate, or work this Matter, as the Cor- pYu Varicofium; some make the Seed fruitful, as the Staio;,A 6 some
fame cam the Seed back from the Stones, and those are cld Dermeieia; fSome keep or contain the Seed so carried, as the Swia/ /Vejds, or the Proflatar; some ejaculate or cat out this Seed from the Vessels into the Womb, as the rar I1 would willingly speak a Word or two of each of thee Parts; but left kind Women (whom my intent is to lease in this Treatise, if doing good to them will please them) hould be ofnded that I explain not those fmnge Names which the Rabies of our and former Ages have uled ao muffle up our Eyes, left we Ihould fee the truth and so break the yoaks of Bondage from offour Necks) left ( I fay) they should be offended, I desire them to take notice, that they (hall find them explained in an Alphabetical Order at the latter end of the Book; the Iniquity of former- times hath been such, that I want it Englilh Terms to express them unless I should Coin them, and that I leave to be done by such as affect Novelties, If I Ihould every time they mention their outlandish Words ( part of which are Greek, part Latin) stand to explain them, it would trouble the Rea- der's Patience much to read them, and mine more to write them therefore when you meet with them, search the Table atthe latter end ofthe Book and you may underfRand them.,I would desire such Gendlemen that are lkilled in Anato- mies (of which I am afraid there are but few) to pardon me in that I have not solow'd the vulgar Rules of Anatomy, I desire them to know that I am not unskilled in most Anaro. mies that are written; and hzve been an Eye-witncfs in all I have written; My Opinion is, that he is not very wife that altogether neglects Authors, but he is a Fool in grain that believes them before his own Eyes, I commit my wri- tin the Tryal and Cerf.lreof time, as they have done beore me, and shall with gladness embrace that Man that in the Spirit of Meaknefs ( which is next of kin to the Spirit of God) d's m2 of my Errors. Be diligent, be diligent; God mal good Men hate idle Men and Women; and that you may be Methodically diligent, be pleased to accept of this firt SeAion, fabdivided into these ensuing Chapter; I hope you will pardon me if I ihould be a little critical, or at least fcr ear your censure till you know, and are able to prove I a% a an Error; te that cenfulrs bfQre he knows, publiih-,eth
eth to the World that he is an envious Fool. They that would be knowing Physicians, let them Afdy these Books of mine, viz. Platerus, Senmertu, Riveriw, Riolwus, Bar. tholinu$, yokhfls, ftingiu.,Chap. Of te Preparing YeClp, I Corpus ariofim 2 q'bi Tel/icle or StoneJ 3 ra.f Deferrtia 4 The Srminal fel c The Yard.,Of all these in Order; and although (perhaps) they may be more than many of you have heard of, yet not one more than is true, nor a tittle more than is useful.,CHAP, I. Of the Vafa Praparantia. Tbeir T HE S E Galen calls ' la aouamcr,,nnelr. and the Latins Vafa Prtparantia, the fittest,term we in Englilh can give them (for .we mull borrow terms of other Nations that we may make the common People believe wonders, that so our selves may grow rich and proud, and keep Folk in ignorance, though,to their own undoing, and the loss of many a dear Lfe. Life) is Preparing Ftfeli, which name is taken from,their office which is to prepare that matter of sub- stance which the Stones convert into Seed and fit it for that' work; they are in number four, two Veins, and as many Arteries.,And here by the way let me infirut you in one notion ( for I make no question that Physicians have kept you in ignorance enough ) the liver is the original of Blood, and difiributes it through the Body by Veins and not the Hearr, as AriAotle's waking Dreams was, viz. That the Heart was first formed in Man, and is the feat of Blood, and the Sm of the Body, as the San is the Heart of the World: But we lall prove another manner ofMirceofinmal Su by and by,,when
when we cor* to shew Astrologically how Man is formed in the Womb. YPifgira and many other Anatomifis which danced after rnfitk's Pipe, fell into the fame Error. It's use is to nourilh Le Body and repair decaying Fleih; and that you mav conceive to be the reason why Men which keep a very slender Diet, fall away in Flesh, because they want Food to breed Blhod enough to nourish them. The Hieart is the original of the vital or quickning Spirit, which it distri- butes to the Body by the Arteries: I pray rmemmber this all along. For you will fee some cffecs of it in the next Chapter.,The Veins (as I told you) are two, a right and A'vzcr. a left; the right proceedeth from the Original,ier.a CGva; the left from the Emulgcnt Vein, al- though haply through that ignorance you have been trained up in, you krow not what belongs to these Veins, neither is my present tafl to teach you; ) ct hereby you may come to a fight of your ignorance and that is the firll !iep to knowledge; and I allire you, if ou wantlove to know- led.e no more than I want will teach you, you may ! it God hinder not ) have mere by one half than you have, before you he two Years older.,I conse.s the Learned make a grievous quoyl what the reafou is, theie two Veins jhculd p.occed from a different Root: I could quit then, and mine own Opinion too, and 1 fLppole you partly b:!ic.-e it; bu: 1 forbear, it being my Opinion that young Naturalifi as vcll as young Chriltians, eught not to be led into doubtful di;putrtions. - Both Arteries arise from the great Artery, which the 'Gmk call ;zi., which is indeed the great Trunk tanu Originll of all the Arteries.,Such as would cure all Diseases, let them read-thefe Books of mine, viz. Platrrus, Sennertulr, R&veriu. Riolanus, Bartbdir, a lon, J. /?r, fingizgn, &c.,CHAP. 11. Of the Corpus Varicofum. y 0 U remember what I told you was the use of the,Veins and Arteries: the preparing Veins and Arteries,,the
the one carrying Blood the other vital Spirits, and all tend- ing to the Propagation of Man: All four tend down directly. to the.Stones; 'tis not my present scope to tell you which. way: They serve as. Labourers to carry the Stones what they nled; as Labourers carry Brick' and Its Us. Mortar to the Masons to.build an Hou.e, so these . carry Blood and vital Spirits to the Stones to make Seed, and now you know whereof Seed is made, 'viz. Vital and Natural Blood or Blood and Vital Spirits (which you please) concoced by the Stones. We {hall have occasion further to speak of this before we come to a conclusion of the Book, it is not proper in this place. But stop a little, Labourers tem- er their Mortar before they bring it to the Brick-layers. neither is it fit the Stones fliould c( all the Work themselves, having four Servants to attend them, therefore these four \'effts, though at their fuil defcenion they keep at small itllance the one from the other, before they enter the Tef- ticles or Stones ( call them .by which Name yoou please ) they Inake a curious implication, intertexture, or twifing the (rne from the other, which the Grctis call u:ea r,¢ .( if I be not milalkecn ) the Word signifies a kif, sometimes the V'in; go into the Arteries; sometimes the Arteries into the Veins; tlen they fcparate again ; the beholding of which brings an exceeding deal of delight to the Eye, and.con- tent to the Mind (I could thew it any Man in the Anatomy of a Dog ) this implication, weaving or Twilling (as I call before is thatwhich rome Chirurgions called Pantrinisiiair, and some CGorpus lovicofwn, which was the thing propound- ed to be treated of in this Chapter.,I dq confers the fame contexture of Veins and Arteries, though not in the fame form, may be found in other parts f the Body, as in the Arms and Legs, else a Man being there wounded could not bleed to Death, for unless the vital Spirit comes out as well as the Blood, he might not loose the Nouriihment for the time, he could not loose his Life. But to proceed -,The fubltance of this interweaving of the Sub/fance. Veins aud Arteries is very hard, long, almost Form. in Form of a Pyramid; without any sensible,hollowness.,Vlc
Ui] Their Use is to mix exealy the Blood and vital,Spirit, and of them both to make one Body, they being also to change the colour of them from red to white, thato the Stones may have a it matter to worfc upon, and the eaier Work todo; therefore the, interweaving reacheth down even to the Testicles themfielves, till it even pierce their Subaance.,CHAP. III. Of tie Teficks, or Stows. T H E Stones are called in Latin, 'Tefte. that KNais. -is witnefi, because they witness one to be a Man; afl the Pope elie, he will tell you I fay true. The Grerb call them t;X8; because they are two. I need not tell you where they are placed, for every Boy that knows his right hand from his left knows that. P/iet.,Their Subfance is white, soft and fpungy, full of fmal Veins and Arteries, and that's the reason Siijl4:cts. that wicn Humours flow down into them, they swell to such a bigriefs.,Their Form is oval, but their bigness is not a- Fom. like, fay Authors; he that hath a mind to know. it's but feeling: They fay the left is the biggest, but the right is the honed which (fay they ) breeds the beRl snd ltrongef Seed; and so they fee Nature together by the ears with it fell, as through the Stones could not agree in their own ation. I fappoie the first reason of this Fancy in Au- thors arose sirs from a truth (as indeed mod Errors did) they knew there was both a iric 'foscalrnka $ and a Microcofmica Maic in the Body of Men; the one of which gave vital Heat, the other radical Moillure to it: Then comes old .rifJstl, and he finding that the CrleialSun ruled the right Eye. and almost all the right part of the Man, and the C-. Itfial .oa the left, and having an over weening conceit of himfedf that he knew every thing. tho' indeed ne knew no- thing at all rationally of the influence of the Planets upon Man, prfenly concludes (before once he had looked whe, thr or no he could prove it) that it was the CIslrial Sun,which
tvhich caufeth the heat and Arength of the right fide of the Body, which indeed is no such matter, for it is the Microlf- mical Swu within the Body which gives the heat to it, and the Microofimical Moon which gives ihe radical moifure, and that I prove by Argument, because Man is internally hottest in the Winter-time, when tle CWeliialSun is the greatest distance from him, as appears by the quickness ofhis digef- tion then. Each Stone hath a Mufcl, which the Learned,called Gr~aftrr, from the Greek word ei.u, .lufcte. which signifies to old up, becaufc they pull up the,Stones in the Ad of Generation, that so the Vef- fels being flackned, may the better void the Seed. Age weakens there Muscles, and then the Stones hang down lower than they do in Youth and Health.,The use of the Stones is, FirI, to convert Blood Use. aud Spirit into Seed. for the Procreation of Man;,and yet by your leaves, they convert not all the Blood that comet to them into Seed, but keep foaie for their own Nourilhment. Secwndi, They add heat, strength and courage to the Body, ana that appears, because lunuchs are neither so strong, nor hot, nor valiant as other Men; neither is an Ox so hot, or valiant as a Bull. As for the Tunicles or Skin that cover and enwrap the Stones, they conduce nothing to our present scope, so I willingly omit them.,Transverse the Stones into a small Body like a silk Worm, which is called Epitdidymi by one extremity of which, the Vessels call'd Deferentia enter the Testicles and from thence carry out the Seminal matter; from the other extrmity passes that Veffcl call'd Jamlatrimn.,C H A P. IV, Of the Vafa Deferentia. T H E Veffes call'd Deferntia are those which cal the,Seed. being perfected and throughly concoted by the Teir heat and force of the Stones, from the Stones to Ojer. the Seminary Vearels, which-are ordained to keep it,till time serve or need require, its expufion,,They
They are in Numbrer two, and no more, in co- lour White, in substance Nervous or Sinewy; AiznAer. they have a certain obscure hollowness in them, and therefore Heropiluas calls them rcfp cavifsuxs', or the Sptrmicid P re'.,They arise up fromthe Stores even unto the Belly, not far diilant from the Preparmin Vessels; when they are come into the cavity of the Belly, they turn back [l. again, and pass to the back fide of the Bladder, betnveen it and the right Gut, when they come near the neck of the Bladder, they are joined to the ceminal Cells, which are not much unlike the Cells, of an Honey-Comb ; theft Cells contain an Oily substance, for they draw the foftrel sub- lance from the Seed, which they empty out into the passage of Urine, chiefly in the At of Copulation: The supposcd rea.on is, that the thin internal skin of the Yard be not of- fended with the Acriminy or f.arpnefs-of the Seed. The I'afa firexfntia ha n pased, these fall into the Glandula Prja:,c, which are. the 'Velels. ordained to keep the Seed; to them now turn we.,To be Ikillful Phvficiars, fludy these Books of mine, viz. Plae.ers, Sc-.mcrInt:, i'euas,, ?idartas, Barth/igzta, yeiastu, ;'iS ismv.#.,CHAP. V. Of thr Semiar.l feriIs. 'T HE Prjfaie or Gleanda'. Se:ir.les, are Defriptict.,offuch a body as the Vulgar when they fnd the like in their Meat, call Kernels.,They are placed between the Neck of the Place. Bladder aud the right Gut. These compass about the RYfa Deyrentia, and through the m;dt of there paffeth the Ur(ttra, or common paffage-both for Seed and Urine; you may if you please, call it- the conduit of the Yard, I know not suddenly what fitter English word to give it; I am persuaded, ant I have rome hunbred crabbed terms to wirnefs it, that the Phyiicians have taken far more pains to lead Men into ignorance, than I shall or can do to teach,them
them knowledge. The ignorance ofourFore -fathers made Phyfic:ans laugh in thlir Sleeves; but the end of all things hiaiens, and that knowledge is breaking out,- which lhall so cnlighten the world, that he who hath but half an eye may fee their bafencfs without a pair of SpeAacles. At the mouth of the Vrcthr'F, where it meets with the Vafa Defrt.ia, which is ( I told you in the Seminal Velfels, is a CGaunck ) their is another of their Terms) in plain Englilh a thickt&ia its office is that the Seminal Vessels, being of a Spungy na- rure,.might not Ihed their Seed against their Will. This Skin which is very ful.pfPo:es,the Pores open throughi heat of the act of Copulation, and so gives paflage to the Seed, which being of a very fubtil Spirit (and the subtiler for being moved) v.illpafs through as Quick-fiver paffeth-through Leather; you can fee no holes in the Leather by which it paifeth, neither can you fee in this Skin, unless in iie Anatomy of a Man that had omne violent running of the Reins when he died, then they are conspicuous; for indeed these Vefiels are the proper feat of that Disease, however it came in time to be called the running of the Reins: I haye.often read that the Reins separate the Urine, but that they contain Seed is believed by none but by the Sons of Tradition.,Besides, many times, by hanging of a Dog, his Breast being swelled by retaining his Breath, and his Bowels be- ing-compreffed by swelling of that hard dung flicking in the right Gut (which will always be if you give him. binding Meat the-day before you ha.ng.him) doth so compress the. V'elfels, that you nay. plainly ditcern these Passages or Pores open. Many times when Children are cut for the Stone, in drawing away.the Stone, (which in my Opinion is a like- liecF way to cure Children) I fiy, many times in drawing away the Stone, there Vefiels are toin, and-.then if.l ply the .Patient- hppen to live, he may keep otheher Mens.hil. dren if he.pleafe, but .will never be aile to getfone:of; his own. Their fubllaace is hard, fpungy, of :the bigntefsf a Walnut or very near; and.their use was. taught yoa-in the former Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of te 2ard. THe Latins have invented very many Names for the,Yard, Ifuppofe done by Venereou People(which Rcmw it eems was full of them, since which times Vices have in- ereafed there afier then Vertues) I intend not to spend time in rehearing the Names, and as little about its Form and Situation, which are both well known it being the least part of my intent to tell People what they know, but teach them what they know not.,t. The Parts of it are partly common to it, and the ret of the Body. ft. The outward &in, Parti cf which invefteth the whole Body; the Eyes, the Ya;d Mouth, &c. excepted; as also the top of the ca6mn. Yard, the GresAt call it askris, the Latins zCtirca ; and we in Engliih the outward skin, or Scarf skin; it is very thin, as thin as the Skin you peel off from the out- ide of a Codlin, it is easily loft, and as soon grows again, and is altogether void of Sense; you may afily thrult a -Needle through it and feel na pain: Its ule is to defend the other Skin from Dust, Sr.oak or what else might offend it, or penetrate its subtile Pores 2d. The Skin the GreeA. call ad, the Latins Cutis which is somewhat thick and full of Pores, through which the Sweat and Fulginous Vapours of the third concocticn (which concoAs Blood into Flesh) pass out; these Pores are very many, as thick as the holes of a Sive, but not so big, indeed they are as thick as they can be, and so fmaU that they are not visible to the Eye ; therefore Physicians call Sweating and the Passage of Va- pours through them, gfilf~kJ Tranfiraioic, indeed they are far wider in some Men and Women Bodies thaa they are in other Come, and that's the reason some Sweat more easier than others do, and such as do Sweat often and easily are not so subjet to Fevers as those are which do nor, be- canfe Fevers are usually caused by Sooty or Fuliginous Va- pours, which infeCt the Blood; which often Sweatingcon- fmes, and fuffcs ihem not to putrific: Hence it comes to,pass
pars that Sweating is a laudable remedy in Fevers, I confers this Skin is somewhat thiner upon the Yard than it is upon some other Parts of the Body.--aggy when the Yard hands not, but Riff when it doth; this Skin is very sensible, be, cauie the Nerves concur to make up its Being. And here I beseech you to take Notice of another grand Truth, viz That the Brains give Se/es to the Body y the Nerves or Sinews (as the Vudgar call them.) And yet Arifotlk for all his great Learning, was of Opinion that the Sense lay in the Flesh, not in the Skin; and dvicen, a notable Arabian Physician, held it lay in the Fat, which is more ridiculous than the former.,3. The Carrea AMemtuana, or flelhy Skin, so called be- cause it lies between the Flesh, not because its Body is fleihy, paffeth in other Parts of the Body underneath the Fat and flicks close to the Muscles; but in the Yard there is no Fat at all, only a few superficial Veins and Arteries pass between the former Skin and this, which when the Yard fIands, are visible to the Eye. These are the Parts common both to the Yard and also to the ref of the Body, which although I have been somewhat large about, yetI cannot account it tedious, because it conduceth to the teach. ing of Knowledge to my Country Men and Women, who have been too long Reined in with the Bridle of Ignorance by Physicians, that so they might the better be ndden by them; for just for all the World as the Popilh PriefRs serve those they call the Laity, which is but a Word derived from the Greek Word At which is People in plain English, as though the Priests were no People, but either Angels (or which is more probable) MonRers; as I fay, the Popish Priess serve their Laity, so do our Physicians serve the com- monalty of this Nation, viz. hide all from them they can; for they know (as well as I know I am alive) that fiould the Vulgar but be a little acquainted with their Myferies, all their Jugling and Knavery would be seen, and their Wealth and EReem, which is the Diana they adore, would be put to a non plus; and that's the reason when you hear any of them cry out againit me for writing Physic in my Mother-tongue, they bring no other Arguments than what the Papists bring for themfilves in the fame Point; neither,have
have they Wit enough to make any better. One holds the WIord of God, the other Plfcr to be a Mystery, and the Vul- gar mull be ignorant in them both, or elle they will do themselves a mischief. A learned Argument! Knowledge doth Men a mischief; what a mad Man was Sol.mon to afe that when he had all the World to choose in ? he should have alked of God a heap of Money as big as Mount Attna, and then above three quarters of the People of this Nation would have been of his Judgment. Those parts of the Yard which are peculiar to itself, and to no other Parts of the Body are fix.,1. fTwo NeroGus Bsdies. 2. Tse Septum. Parts of 3. fTe Lrc:'ra. the TIard 4. Th4e Glans. tartirtular 5. fTvefror l.'sffcles. to itself 6. Tis IY ,ls.,Of these in Order. The two Bodies (for they are two, though joined together) are long, hard and sinewy; they are fpungy within and full of black Blood; the fpsngy Sublfance of the inward part of it seems to be woven together like a Net, and consists of innumerable twigs of Veins and Arteries. The black Blood contained therein is very full of Spirits, and the Latins call it Pec'inifrmi.s. The delights ordefire of Venus adds heat to these, which caufeth the Yard to stand; and that's the rea- son venereal fights and venereal tales willdo it ; it needs be no firanger to any, that renus (being a Planet cold and moili) Ihould add heat to those parts, that than the Moon (being colder and moister than she) should burn by night, as the Scripture witnefics, Pfal. 121 6. An Astrologer can give you a natural reason of either, and to shall I when I come to handle the Formation of the Child in the Womb ARfrologically; the hollow fpungy intertexture or weaving was ordained purposely to hold or contain the Spirit of ve- nereal heat; to that the Yard may not fall before it hath done its work; you fee what a rational piece the Lord made when he made Man. These two lateral or fide ligaments of the Yard, where they are thick and round, spring from,the
the lower part of the Share-bone, and not from the upper part, as Galen dreamed; at the beginning they are fepara. ted the one from the other, and relemble a pair of Horns, or the Letter Y, where the Urethra or common channel of Urin and Seed paffeth between them.,z. They, soon as they come to the joining of the Share- bone are joined by the Septum Luciduin, which is my second internal pzrt to be described; it is in fubltance white and nervous, or sinewy; its office is to uphold the two lateral or fide ligaments, and the UretlhraP.,3. The Urethre is the third of the internal parts of the Yard, and which for all Physicians have given such an un- couth word, it is nothing else but the Channel by which both Seed and Urin is conveyed out. It is in substance sinewy, thick, soft, and loose, like to that of the fide ligaments before-mentioned, it begins at the neck of the Bladder, yet doth not spring from it (for if you boil the Bladder of any Beast, you may fee it separate itself from it) but is only joined to it, and so pafleth to the Glans.,In the beginning of it are three holes; one in the midst which is largest, which receives the Urin into it; the other two are smaller, which are sent from each femrinal Vessel to it, by which it receives the Seed.,The Muscles of the Yard are four, two on each fide. But before I treat of them, give me leave to tell what a Muscle is. A Muile is an Instrument of .vluntary mstion, A vithout ewhich no part of the Body can move ifelf; the Micro- cofnical Sun moveth the whole Body, as we Ihall ihew more hereafter; but because there is no way from the beginning of a thing to the end, without a mean, so the Microcofmical Suu in the Body makes use of the Muscles to move the Body.,It confilts of Fibrous Flesh to make up its Body, of Nerves for its Sense, of Veins for its Nourilhment of Arte- ries for its Vital Heit of a Memnrana or Skin to knit it to- gether, and to diftinguilh one Muscle from another, and all of them from the Flelh; you may, if you look, easily dif- tinguifh them in a Leg of Mutton or any other Meat where they are. But to proceeds the Yard (as I told you) is,endued
endued with four of them, two on each fide. It is my pre. feot scope to {hew whence they arise only take notice, that the one of each fide is Ihorter and thicker, and their use is to ere& the Yard and to make it fland, and are therefore called ErtSorrt. The other are longer and smaller, and their office is todilate or open the lower part of the Urethrar or Channel both for making Water, and voiding the Seed, and are therefore called dcceratorws.,5. The Glas is the extrcam part of the Yard, soft and of an exquisite feeling, by reason of the thinness of the Skin wherewith it is covered; it is covered with the pra~tnum or fore-Skin, which in some Men covers the top of the Yard uite cloe, in others it doth not, which moving up and own in the ad of Copulation, brings Pleasure both to the Men and Women; The top of this is that which the 7te.ws were commanded to cut off on the eighth day. The Liga- ment by which the Praputium or fore-Skin is tied to the Glau, is called Frenwa, or the Bridle.,6. The Vessels of the Yard are Veins, Nerves and Ar- teries. And yea refalw, /if Coltmbs fpcaks true) affirm'd (tho' most falfy) that there was neither Vein nor Nerve in it. Some Veins and Arteries pass by the Skin, and, as I told you before, are visible to the Eye, others pass by the inward part of the Yard; here the Arteries are wonderfully diferfed thro' the Body of the Yard, far exceeding the Dii- perfion of the Veins, for the right Artery is dispersed to the left fide; and the left to the right fide.,It hath two Nerves, the Iceser of which is beltowed upon the Skin, the greater upon the Muscles and Body of the Yard. To cure all Diseases read my Plattru, Sennertus, kiwriaw, Riikn, Bartabnima, &c.,SE C T. 2. Of bte Genitak in Womre. HAving served my own Sex, I Ihall fee now if I can,,please the Wo-anr, who have no more cause than Mm (that I knowof) to be alham'd of what they -have, and would be grieved, as they had cause (for they could not,lie)
live) if they were without; but have cause if they rightly confider of it, to thank me for telling them -omething they knew net before I Ihall divide it into there Chapters: 1. Of the priJy P/Jsage. 2. Of the WYO- ..3. Of te Stoes. 4' Of the Spermatic e YFeis.,(A these are far more exaaly derited in Veflingius's Aate- vm in English. Ana al/o in Riolanus's Anatomy thy are rrnm cearly defcriedt, 'with the Difafis incident to the Parts, a ithe Seat of the Diseases. And for the Care of all Diftafes, fee Ri- · verius' Pratice of Ph.fick in Engibh ),CH A P. I. Of the Priey Pafage. N this I Ihall confider but these seven following Parts. 1. The Lips, which are visible to the t You my fee Eye at the firtl Sight, they are framed of vbwat thy are the Body, + and have pretty fiore of fpungy in the Aeginnirg fat; there use is to keep the internal Parts of the Chipteo I:om Cold and DuR. of the ard.,z. The Vy'-pA or Wings, which appear when the Lips are fever'd, they are framed of soft and fpungy Flesh, and the doubling of the Skin. placed at the fides of the Neck tley compass the Citoris, and in For and Colour refem- bicing the Comb of a Cock.,3. The Clitori is a sinewy and hard Body, full of spun- gy and black Matter within, as the fide Ligaments of the Yard are; in form it represents tht Yard of a Man, and sus- seis Eredion and falling as that doth;this is that which caufeth Lull in Women, and gives delight in Copilation for without this a Women neither desires Copulation, nor hath Pleasure in it, nor conceives by it. Some areof Opinion, and I could almoR afford to fide with them, that such kind of Creatures they call Her.aph.rdites, which they fay bear the Genitals both of Men and Women, are nothing cfe but such Women in whom the Clitoris hangs out externally, and so resembles the.form of aYard; I leave the truth-or fallhood of it to be judged by such who have seen them A.,a natomized:
utomiu4: Howeverz this is agreeable both to Reason and .4ahority, that the bigger the Critrit is in Women, the worq la l they are.,4.. VUder the C&itwi. and above the Neck, is the Paffaga of the Won.ens Urine, so that the Urine of the Woman co~O. not thro' the Neck of the Womb, neithcris the Pas- ageof the Urine common as in Men, but particular and by ialf. and therefore Injeclions for fupprelfing of Urine in. Women, or the like, you may if yu.. have not a Care, ea- fily err, by putting the Syringe into the Neck of the Womb, instead of the Paflage of Urine.,5. Near this are fourCaruncles, or flefly Knobs, which because they resemble the form of Mirtle-herries, the La- tins call them ye-tifsar.a: These are round in Virgins, but hang flagging when Virginity is loft; the uppermoll of them is lrgeR and forked, that so it might receive the Neck of the Paflage of Urine, the other are below this on the fides, they all keep back both Air and other things from entering the Neck of the Womb.,6. In Virgins the Caruncles or Knobs are joined together by a thin and sinewy Skin or Mllnia..:e, interlaced with many fall Veins, which- hath a hole in the midlt thro' which the Menltrual Blood paffeth, aXut the bigness of ones litle Finger; in such as are grown up, this is that no- ted Skin which is called Hyman, and is a certain note of Virgaiity where-eer it is found, for the firit ac of Copu- lation breaks it. I confers much controverfie hath been amongi Anatomilb concerning this; some holding there is no tuch thig at all, others that it is, but it is very rare; the truth is, mnio Virgins have it; some hold all; I must sus- pend my own Judgment till more Years bring me more Ex- perence; yet this is certain, it may be broke without Co- pulaion, as it may be gnawu asunder by a Defluxion of luhrp lnmour3s especially in. young Virgins, becauoe it is thinet in them, as also by unlkilful Pejariea, to provoke the Terms, and how many ways ele God knows.,WhatAuthors insert of the mJs, I can tell you; firR the ratizu held it to be a Conjuntion of five Veins so placed on both fides, that they are joined together: This Opiaio~ wa long fce exploded.,a. iterneli
2. Fernelhis and Uln/s were of Opinion that the fides of the Neck of the Womb Iluck together, which in the first A&t of Copulation, were broken aiunder.. This is as vain as the other;,3. Severinut Pinerus held it to be a McniArtne, which bound together those four Carunclcs, or flelhy Knobs, as I described it before.,4. Vesalius, Fallopiu, Cagfrius, and other Italian Anato- mifls held it to be a transverse Mnembrane, occupying the whole Cavity of the Neck of the Womb, and placed a little above the Neck of the Bladder. Whatsoever it be his 'tis certain.,Fi-rl, That where it is, it hath certain Veins in it which bleed in the breaking of it; this was that note of Virginity which God gave to the Hebrme's; and I myself believe it is natural in all Virgins, unless they break it with their Finger) or by some other means. For it was no way probable, that God would have given them for a certain sign of Virginity,' which Cclumbus and Ambbrofe Pany fay is not always found;. and Lair-entiris denies that ever he saw it. It is very pro- bable the Iebre'w Virgins were more chary in preserving it,. than the Italiams were ; and good reason they Ihould, not' only for their Honour fake, but also for the command of God. The Carwmmla or flelhy Knobs, together with this, resembles the form of a Rose half blown, and therefore an- ciently called a Flower, and thence came the Word (to d- fScti' a Yirgin.),7. The Neck of the Womb is nothing else but the dif- tance between the Privy-paffage, and the Mouth of the Womb, into which the Man's Yard goes in the a& of Co.' pulation, and in Women of reasonable stature it is eight Inches in length.,Its Substance is flelhy without, skinny and exceeding wrinkled within. And it is so wrinkled,,I, That it may better retain the Seed in the AC of Co- pulation.,2. Thatit may dilate and stretch in the Travail or Bear- ing of Children, and the Passage may be wider; the Neck of the Womb is feated between the l'afiage of Urin and the right Gut, to thew fond Man what little Reason he bhad tq,Bz bc
be proud and domineer, being conceived between the Places ordained to catl out Excrements, the very finks of the Body, and in such a manner that his Mother was ashamed to tell him how it hath two Mnmrarma, and if you cut them you may perceive between them a fpungious Flelh, such as is found in the fide Ligaments of the Yard which containeth Spirits, and caufeth it to swell in the a& of Copulation, and furnilhed it with innumerable springs of Veins and Ar- teties: To cure all Diseases, read my Platrus. Sennertus, rris,, Riolanis, Bartbalin, Jsohnln, VYi9ingiuas &c.,C H A P. II. Of the f'.-.. G ItE£2 and Hipteractes, and mol of the Greks call the,Womb Uwr s and ,c, and some Xa;go, and there: fore the usual Word the Septuagint gives for [great with,Child] is y x:r.Xr-, the Latins call it Matrix and naeS. UterwS; and we E£giijh some follow the Latin Word,Matrix, but the only Englilh Word is the lfonmb. Parti. Its Parts are two the Mouth of the Womb, and the,bottom of the Womb. I. The Mouth is a hole at the entrance into it which may be both dilated and Ihut together like a Purse; for altho' in the A& of Copulation it be big enough to receive the Glans of the Yard, yet after Conception it is so close Ihut, that it will notadmit the Point of a Bodkin to enter; yet again at the Woman's Delivery it is so open, that it makes room enough for the Child to come out, be it never so big. This was the matter of Gakn's Admiration, and gives cause to every one of us to admire at the Wonderful Works of God in the Creation of Man ! Who is there that knows himfeif, but may know there is an All.powerful God ?,If the llatrx be inverted, hardned, ulcerated, have Scars on it, or-be too moist, there can be no Conception: For if it be inverted, it is not directly opposed to the Yard, then cannot the Seed be direflly call into it, the Seed cools, and by con equence becomes unfruitful. If it be hardned, it admits not the entrance of the Glans or top of the Yard: f it be ulcerated, it flies the very touch of the Yard: If it,have
have a Scar on it, there is no way for the Seed to enter in . If too moif, it cannot retain the Seed when it is in. Of all these their Signs and Cures, in another Chapter. Ohlly take notice, that Hippocrates in his fall Book of the Diseases of Women, affirms, that the often use of the a& of Copu- lation makes the Womb slippery, and hinders Conception.' As also, tho' Authors fay, it is the Inversion or Hardness, or Ulcers or Scars of the Womb hinders Conception by such means as I recited, it-is not probable to me ; for Nature be- ing sent in the World by the Eternal God, for the Increase and Multiplication of Things in the Elementary World, h.th-placed a Magnetic I'rtue in the Womb, that it drawv' the Seed to it, as the Load-flone draws Iron, or the Fire the Light of the Candle. I rather therefore think t:Ie rea- Ibn why these hinder Conception, is this, because the Womb is so busied in faccouring itself, that it cannot per- set any Conception, you know a Man that is sick or wounded, cannot Work, tho' his WVo:k lie beside him. The.Womb itfelP in Figure is almost perfecly Figures iound, in Virgins it exccrdeth not the birnefs of a Walr.t, yet when a Woman hath conceived, it eslates itself ibthat Capacity; that it is able to contain the Child with all its Appurtenances. It is finall because the Seed is bnt little in quantity, which it ought to embrace and cherilh: it is made up of two Skins, the one internal, the. It Fra.'. other external, the external is thickest, and very smooth and slippery, if you except thole Parts where the Spermatick Vefifls enter into the Wourb, the internal are full of. holes.,It differs much in form from the lMairi of Beasts, and' that Gakn -was ignorant of, for indeed and in truth Gaien never saw a Man or Woman difieted in his Lifetime, it be- ing accounted abominable in his time to use such supposed Cruelty upon the dead Corps, and therefore he difrected only Apes, which was the cause he wrote such an Apilh Anato- my, It seems the Grariawn in Galn's Days were as pevifi as our Citizens now-a-days -are, who think heir Childrcn er Friends were little less than Murthered even after they are dead, if a Chirurgeon lhould but open their Bodies to fee but of what Disease they died; which if they would but,B3 'i. fser
-asser, it would tend infinitely to the increase of know. edge in Physicians, and the good of Mankind in ge- neral, yea, and to the prefirvation of their own Children then living; for I know divers that have buried their own Childlh of one and the fame Disease. It hath but one only Cavity, and yet Mmar his Opinion was, That there ware seven Cells in it; and he and Galen (because they were famous Men, were followed as little God-a-mighties that they cannot err) have so poisoned the World with this Doc- triw, that mol Midwives that I have talk.d with, hold in- deed that the Womb hath seven Cells, each able to contain a Child a piece, forsooth; and so a Woman may have fe- ven Children at a Birth naturally, and no more; and this is ju as true as the Moon is made with green Cheese. There is in truth but one only Cavity in the Womb, and I cannot but admire why any that hath seen a Woman Ana- tomized, should be of any other Opinion, unless they flould take the Holes where the Spermatick Vessels come into the Womb, to be Cells. I shall (God willing) in my next Book fipak more of the Conception of Twins in the Womb, and alo how they are separated. I fall here end with the Womb: For what else neceflary concerning it is to be def- cribed, the next Book will manifcl.,

CHAP. III. Of , .Stoe,. T HE Stones of Women (for they have such kind of,Toys as well as Men) difier from the Stones of Men. I. In Place; for they are within the Belly-in Women, but without in Men.,t. In Magnitude; for they are less in Women than in Mw.,i.I Form; for they are uneven in Women, butfmooth i Men. 4. They are ot laid in Women by Muscle, but by Li- pments.,s. They haveo Prcrta.,6. They 6. They differ in Figure; for they are depresscd or flatih- in Women, but oval in Men.,7. They have but one Skin, whereas Men have sout; and the reason is, because Mens are exposed t the cold as being without the Belly, so are-not Wotens.,8 Their Subtante is more soft thin in Men. 9. In Temperature they are colder than Mens are The use of the Stones in Women is the fame that they are in Men, 'viz Two -concot Seed, and of this Judgment was Hitpporaes in ancient Days, and yet aflAotk had the face to deny that Womenhad any Seed atall, though again f both Reason and Experience. Also .wio PItar uin his C:dleflial Ohfervations, goes about to Trove the veri fame thing in the AMoo, which a*fflote -quotes in Women he as- tirms, That the Mooon ly fpplies nmte~ for the S to work upon in the Generation of things here below, even as the Female doth the Mdle in the Generation of Mm~; .am that he learned of ,.itsotk, and f? he tonfafies. Buot those that hi*e Atdied &t aicalJ-t lfi 1y.imaow, wde .o Agh, that the moisture which the 3im beitows tp the Earti, ihath an aitive Principle in-i;t ydafuch an afivePrinciple that the World cannot Rand without it, nor Philofophen operatewithout it. OtherOpinions there are, which I ihin not mentian here beeaufe they belong not :properly tb the point in Hand, butreferve them to their prop Place..,And thua much briefly for their St& - . ; .,

CHAP . 1V : Of tAc a e tVJl. - r T'EIp Spermatick Veldels ih Woffn also are divided into,Praer4ryania, or preparing Vel'els; and DefrtkJtia, dr carrying Vessels.,The rardda;tia differ not in numbe from thofein ,M -; for they aifo' are four, two Veins and two Afteries; thir Rife and Original is the fame also as in Men: 'therig1t Vein.fpringeth from the Trank of the ermn ~rza (WIhtkte uena Cawa rs, yon fall be taught at the latter 'end-iF the Book, where all hard Names Ihall be explained, and that,B 4 Course
Course hereafter will I keep in all my Writings.) The right Vein I fay fpringeth from the Trunk of the I'tna Cawa under the Emulgent, but the left fpringeth from the Emulgent of the fame fade,. both Arteries spring from the great Artery, which the Greg call a-i.,Yet thee is some difference between the Preparing Vessels in Men,_ and those in Women i else I needed not have trou - bled myfilf about them.,s. They are lhorter in Women than they are in Men, be- cauo their PaHag is ihorter, the Stones of a Woman lying within the Belly, but of Men without, in lieu of which hey have far more wreathings-to and fro, in and out, than hey have in Men, so that the fubfiance they carry may be he bette prepared: They often turning to and fro, making amends for the hortnefs of the Passage.,t* They are not united as they are in Man, before they come to the Stones, but are divided into two Branches, wher~ the greater only paffeth the Stones, the lefler to te Womb, for nouriihment both of itself and the Infant in i One quaint Observation let me note, and then I have done with the Prpaing Vefls: It is thus; The Sperma- tick Ven; receive the Arteries a they pals by the fide ofthe Womb, and so there is a mixture between the vital and na- tal Blood, that so the Work might the better be wrought:- Soris you blow up the Spermatick Vein with a Quill, you may peceive both the right and left Vells of the Womb bown op from whence may be easily apprehended the Com- munion of all the Veiels of the Womb. The Deferenia or Carryig Veliels spring from the lower part of the Stones. They are in colour white, in substance sinewy, they pats not to the Womb fraight, but wrcathed,. that so the lhort- ess of the way may be recompenced by the multitude of the Windings near the Womb, they become broad again. They proceed in two Parts from the Womb, which resemble orns, and are called the Horns of the Womb And they may be seen in Female Bcafs as well as in Women, tho' their Wombs differ far: In these Horns do these 'Vaal Dft-,siia end, and by them pals into the Womb. Sh as would be iii Pbyficians, let them read there,Books
Books of mine, dviz. Piaterus, SeIrrt,; Riviiw RiamPe ,s Bar:bolinus, oAbnpnflo Vli'ftigi, &c.,SE CT. 3. How to prefere the Injlirtmen of Gentration pure. T is so apparent a Truth, that it needs no proof, that the reason why so many Infants die in their Infancy is to be fought for in the Parents, it being clearthat the Children of unhealthful Parents seldom live long; this was clearly seen by the ancient Alckymils, who referred the Original of all Difea'es to the Seed of the Parents, even as the Original of Plants is in their Seeds; for the Diseases have not their Original from the Elements, but from their own proper Seed of that Disease in them. Ptiloiophers know that the Sun makes Gold of one Earth and Flints of another, according as they are fitting, let such therefore as desire to have their Children live, ule such means as may keep thebflr~mrntt of Generation pure and clean, and their Blood pure, that so thei Sed being pure Nature having pure matter to workupon, make her work p-rfett andfo fubje& to live, and notprone to die: To this end. I ihall give here two. general Remre- iies to two general Evils, which I conceive to be the chief cnufie of the Death of Children in their Infancy, aid let such Parents as desire their Children should live, bevery careful in observing of them.; as for particulars. they may he found hereafter in this Book. The firt, fmtearcnce of Diat. The second, Exerdfe of Bod.y. And let each hand in a Chapter by itfclf.,C H A P. I. , Of 'emparcne in D;,t. EXcellent and true was the-Speech of Gaein, Plawre grm,periere quam gladio, The Throat deltroys more than,the Sword doth; Excess in cither Meat or Drink canfeth Crudi& ties; Crudities caufeth ill Blood; of ill Blood cannot be,BR ~ made %
made good Seed, and by this means Parents often come by the Death oftheir Infants, even in their Infancy, and know not of it.,The Cure of Intemperancy is to be performed by Tempe- rancy, and they that use it ihall find by Experience that it will not only as a means underGod, lengthen the lives of the Children but also bring singular Benefits both to the Bodies and Minds of thePaents, for look how much difference there is in Purity between Water which is muddy, and Water which is clear, so much and more also there is between the Blood and the Seed of those that keep a Temperate, and those that keep an Intemperate Diet. I Ihall be very brief in aying down this, that so I. may, as much as lies in my Pow- *r, inftru you, and do you good, and not tire your Pati. emce with a tale of a Cock and Bull; therefore confider.,x. That by a Temperate Diet, I intend that such an ex- as quantity of Meat and Drink should be taken into the Stomach, as the Stomach is well able to concoA and digelf lfecrly, which fufficeth the due Nourihmentof the Body disrentrly according to the Imployment either of the Body or Mind; the Meafre of Food ought to be as much as pof- ibly may be proportionable to the quality and condition of te Stomach, the reason is clear because it is the Office of de Stomach to digest it: Hence it appears.,a. That such as lead a ftLdious Life ought not to Eat so inuch as those that lead a laborious Life, becanfe the Di- gefion is not so good; therefore their Meats ought to be less in quantity, and lighter of Digestion.,a. The measure m refpet of Quantity is not the fame to allforts of People, but very different, and that three ways.,irf, In refpea of the diversity of the Air, for such as live in hot Countries mufl eat less Meat than those that live in cold, and less in Summer than in Winter, in one and the fame Country.,$cadl, In refpeA of the Persons themselves Eating: For divers People are of divers Complexions; and diversity of Cnmplexions requircs a diverse quantity of Food: The way sot a Man to find out what Complexion he is of, and b what qantity of Food is adreable to that Complexion,,*i
is very plainly laid down in my Traiillatioii of GCaf*' t of Ph;ic, to which I refer you.,Th7ird)', In refpea of Age, for Youth req*its a reater quantity than old Age ; and ro do those that arie ih Iedltk require a greater quantity than those that are gick: Atd hereby the way, I have wilhed an hundCred times, and'do wish till, that one foolish Falhion in this Nation wer left, namely, inciting Sick People to Eat much; whereas if the Disease come out of Repletion, as mobt Diseases do, Fat- ing is far better Cure for them than Feeding.,3. Hence it comes to pass that a greater quantity of some Meats is to be taken then of ether some. Meats ar more appropriated to one Stomach then another, and fotme Meat are lighter of Digestion then other come.,4. Such as uie bodily Exercise ought to take a greater quantity of Food, and such as is harder of Digestion; then luch as only lead Rudions Lives, and exercise the Faculties of the Mind only; the reason is clear; for th Exercises of the Mind hinder Concotion, because they call up the whole Powers of the Spirit to succour the Brain andUniderflaridini; hence it comes to pass, that a Man that is intent upon his Study, he regards not what he fees, nor hears, not what his dearest Friends fay to him but either he anfwersthem not at all, or else nothing to the purpose. This is the first Confider- ation.,I Confider that the greatet Dfficulty lies in this tiz. in finding out the exa& measure of Diet: This I lhall labour to remove,X. By shewing you the Grounds of thi Difficulty, 2. By giving you some Remedies to remove it. I. The Grounds of the Difficulty seem to me to conif in Pleasure; for Pleasure knows not the Bounds of Necessity, neither doth Luff know where Neceflfty ends; for if you miind it you mall find.,Firif, That Appetite is many times prolonged far beyond the Satisfaction of Hunger or Thirf, so that three or four times so much as would fuflce Nature is 'thit into thf Body of Liquorilhnefs.,SroedY, Appetite many times proceeds fr6m te. Appr. henuoa of 'the Fanccy Fan conceives Met 'to the de-,B6 lightfil
lightfiu and pleasant, and Appetite follow's them, when 1Rafon itself fetifies itto behurtful.,z. I fall give you some Remedies or Rules whereby you may fnd out the fit Measure of Meat and Drink; and they ar these;,Fr.f, If you take so much Food at a time, (be it Meat or Drink, it matters not) as makes you unfit for Study, or other Duties of the Mind, then it is apparent you have ex- cdeded the due measure; for it is very clear that all the Of- fence that proceeds to the Brain by way of Food, arifeth from the abundance of Vapours which are sent up from the Stomach to the Head, which either would not be at all, or clfe would be pure, if you had not either eat or drank too much.,S&.bond, If you find a dulness, heaviness and weariness after Food, or a pronnenefs to Sleep so loon as you have eaten, be sure you have taken too much 'for Meat and Driilk ought to refrefi the- Body, and make it chcarful, and not to opprets it, and make it dull.,TUir4, Avoid all iorts of Food by which you afterward End Prejudice, tho' you delight your Palate never so much when you eat them; for that which pleafeth the Palate. doth not always please the Liver; and if they agree not with the Liver, they cause Curnidities, Cloudiness and Diizinefi of the Brain, Wind, Diflillation upon the Lungs, 'c. i Fulrt)., I lhall only give you one Caution more, and thatis this, fubrlrat from your excess in Diet by little and little; for Naturt atabor all fudde Cburge,. to' they tefrom AJto god: As ill Cuflom got Poffeflion over Nature by degrees.,3. Come we now to the last Cenfideration, in which we hall endeavour to prove, that Intemperance in Diet in the Parents, canfeth the Death- of'many of their Children in their Infancy, even before any Direction in their Nativities ceme to cut them offr That we fhal endeavour to do thus:,Fir/t, If it cause Corruption in the Blood and Seed of the Parents, -it muftneeds haften the Difbolution of the Children; the ift cf which we mhall prove thus: Almof all Diseases tave their Original from Repletion; i. taking more,- '~ - ' Meat.
Meat and Drink than I/ture requires, or the Stomach can well digest, as is excellently well laid down by the Wifc Man, Eclef. 37, 29, 30, 31. Be nti wfatiabk ianydaity thing, nor too greep upon Meats; for xceft of Meat brigtth Sicinetf, ad Surfeiting 'will turn into Choler. By Surfeiting hath many Peried, but be that taeth bered, prolongetb bii Lift. Secwdly, Confider, that all Crudities are nothing but an imperfet Concofifon of Food; for when the Stomach re- ceives more Food than it can digest, the Chyle made of fuck Meat must needs be crude, because the Stomach maketh a Corruption instead of a Concoaion.. Then confider, Thirdly, The Liver cannot turn bad Chyle into goo4 Blood; neither can the TeRicles convert bad Blood into good Seed, because the second Concoction cannot amend the fault committed in the firlt, nor yet can the third amend the Faults committed in the second: Hence you fee that it comes to pass that Men and Women give the occasion of the Death of their Children before they are begotten.,Fourthly, On the contrary, for contraries mightily illust rate one another; from a Temperate Diet is good Chyle caused, such as is agreeable to Nature from good Chyle is. good Blood bred; and from good Blood good Seed and from good Seed, firong Children, lufy and healthful, which according to the Principles of Nature are subjet to live. And so much for this Chapter.,

CHAP. IV. Of the Exterior of the Womb. THat ever God ordain'dMen or Women ihould Lve idly,,I never yet read nor heard; and Lyeuwg the famous Spartan Commander, being alted the reason why he forced Young Virgins to Labour ? Anfwer'd very wifely and dif- creedy, that thereby cleansing their Bodies of evil Excre- ments,: they, might bring forth liRy Children when they. were Married; a prudent Speech well bef.-eming the Man that uttered it, and very fit to be practised in every Come mon-wealth. But that I may ihew how the Exercise of the Body of the Parent conduceh to the Life of the Child,,confider
confider it tirs up natural Heat in them, there is as much difference between a Man's Body when natural Heat is stir- red up, and when it is not flirred up, as their is between the Earth in WiVter and Stmrr; when the Sun tirs up natural Heat in the Element, the Earth rejoicerh and brings forth its increase; when the Swu departs, and by his distance can- not fir up natural Heat, then the Earth is dismantled of the Beautywhich the Spring belowed upon her, and mourns like the Trees in OoAer: Even so in the Body of Man, if natural Heat be capable of Conco&ing pure and good Seed for the Generation of Man, which it cannot do so long as it lies Suckling in his own Center, the MicrocofricalSun.,a. Moderate Exercise equally difiributes the Spirits throughout the Body; and if so, then of necessity they mutt needs be equally distributed in the Seed; those that have fredied Nazreal Phi!ofpty, know well enough that it is the unequal diffribution of the Elements which caufeth the Death of all Things ; and the more they are unequally dif- tributedin aThing, the fader its Difrolution hallens; so that you may ref affiredly conpident of the Truth of this, that the more equally your Spirits are distributed in your Bodies, the more equally will they be diflributed in your Seed; and by confcquence so much the more probable are your Chil- drcn to live.,3. Moderate Exerrife by opening the Pores, cleanfeth the Blood of those fulginous or footy Vapours which usually offend i:: Ald this is the reason Sweating is such a good Remedy in Fevers. Now then, if the Blood he cleansed of what offcnds it, or corrupts it before it be sent down to the Tellidces G be Concoaed into Seed, the Children bred of this parised Seed must needs be fronger, and by confe- ucence more fuije~ to live. Thus you fee what Reason faith to the Point, -viz That moderate Exercise of the Parents conduceth much to the Lives of the Children. I shall call up my other Brother, ,.z. Dotor ETrimc', to Tefify the truth of this.,You fee, nay, you cannot but fee, unless you are wilfully btid, that poor People such as work- hard, and fare hard; and are seldom Idle, have more Children, and thoferunger and lier of Body, and ufuay longer lived thaw such as,live
live Idly, and fare deliciously; tell me else what becomes of allour Citizens Children, there being scarce so many of them to be found now, as may be proved have been born in halfa Year's time i I am confident not so many oftem are now to be found of seven Years of Age: They that will be Wife, let them be Wife. AND thus mucbfar y PHir Book, whicb aontains the 'snaof~,of the Parti dedicated to the Procreation of Man, or at kafl of ino any of them as may ser e for a groad dWor to the fo/llving Diftourfi; and this needs no Guide, as beisg iwff thtb Guide and Basis to the -whole Wlrk.,Of tie Formation of tie C a I LD ia ti ,,WOMB. BOOK II. P R 0 OE M I U M. Would willingly have omitted here to the proud Con- ceits of the Learned Rabbies of our Age, to wit. That no Creature is Rational but Man (as intending to write of it hereafter in another Treatise) whereas indeed there is no natural Wifdomr which Man hath found out by his Study, but the fame is naturally to be found in the Creature taken inafenfu coiroto, nay, and far excelling Man, nay, the bes of Men breathing, when they have spent their time, and tired their Brains in Study: it's pofible a few Creatures (au Horses, and Oxen, and Aires and the like) which Man hath brought up in Slavery, may not he so rational as-their Masters. A Bird that has been brought up in a Cage, will fly into the Cage again, tho' you take him out and set him en the further fide of the Table; but a Bird that was broaght up in the Woods, and so knows what Liberty is, if you A&ut him in a Case) he wille o tos A di, t madmf.,Tho
The rearon is, because the firit knows not what Liberty is, but by Bondage is in a fort deprived of Reason. Did not the wiedf of Men fay, Opprtfie riU make a ,ui/f Man mad And is mna~d ought else but deprivation of Reason ? We cannot know whether Creatures at Liberty have any Religi- on or Knowledge of God or not; we may guess from Psad. to4. If we do but mark what we read that they have; however this is certain, They never went together by the Ears about it as we have done ; but as for an absolute Com- mon-wealth, take it as a. Free State, or Monarchical, Man comes as far Ihort of the Wisdom of Creatures, as I do of the Wisdom of Slosmon.,X. That such of the Creatures that hold a Free State, and if -gar may be believed, such are Le.cft ; The Locuefi havg o Kig, je the go forth i, Bauds; They have no Kings therefore a fice State; they go out in Bands, therefore have they Government. The Word (Band) signifies Government as well as Number; for Soldiers ungoverned, will sooner make a Rout than a Regiment.,2. Take another Monarchical State, and they are Bees, read but Butler' Book of Beer, written altogether from Ex- periene, and you flall fee what an admirable Martial Com- mon-wealth they keep, how patient in private Wrongs; for if you abuse a Bee in the Field she will not iting you if Ihe can poflbly get away without, yet do but affront them at home, then the Wrong is publick, then if you would save yourself you mull run for it. The Truth is, no Monarchy of Men throughout the whole Universe was ever compared to them, and yet they never read EtiI, and are utterly un. acquainted with Mabiava/imri/ , whereas Man for all his Rcafon he brags so much of, and all his Reading and Learn- ing could never frame such a Monarchy, but may, nayhath undone itself even by Civil Wars, (the worst of all other) witnes the Grtram and Roma Monarchies, that I may not speak one Word of EngVad.,The very Truth is, Man hath far more Pride than other Creatures (the Lord keep me from such Reason) who hav- ing tom a little Knowledge from one Creature, and- a little from another, and by comparing what one Creature doth, with what another daot, having a few of them bred up in,fubjedion.
fubjetion and slavery that they can have no commerce one with another, unless it be to pity one another in their slavery (for it's probable that Birds and Beafis underfand one ano- thers Language, though we underfiand but little of theirs (the Cucxou excepted) so that for want of Liberty they can- not come to the knowledge of their own State; and then Man vapours that he is the only Rationia Creature upon the Earth. Oh abominable Pride !,I was something the larger upon this Subjet, because the knowledge of it is one means to move Men to look upon Jesus Christ, and expec his Spirit, and to long after an U- nion with God through him, when they do but fee what miserable Creatures Sin hath made them: Besides hereby a .Man may sooner come to the knowledge of himself, which is the greateR of all Earthly Knowledge. I am come nowq to the matter, nvhich is, hew proud, thou&g,minferabl, Man isjfomed in tie Woem. HIS matter being of great Importance not only is t Physic, but also in Pkilost.l; I lhall be as Methodi- cal in it as I can, therefore I fall treat of it in a double way.,5 s. PhbiruaIl. ai z. .JIrolfcarl. And let each fland in a Sedion by itfilf.,S E C'T. I. when they are in Order, because God is the God of Order) I shall note.,1. TI xppropr Part. of te Cbild, 2. The Foration of the Child aed it, Sitati in i the IWm . 3. Anfutr tofme needfal ie feioni. And let each of th;fe alo make the Complcmant-of ae Chapter.,CH' A'Pr

CHAP. I. Of tie Part fropr ta tAi CAI in the Womb. '-,Call those Parts proper to the Child in the Womb only, which help either to nourish it there, or to cloath or de- fend it there; and either cad away, or are of no ife, iun. less perhaps Plp/lcaI or Aleic.dal; it being Born.,Theie 1hal divide into two Parts. 1. Ti& Uniiicr, so rNetrd-l'lcrs. 2. T$e SUaZie. Thefrfl, serves for its internal Use. Thefirod forits external. Thefirft nowiiheth it; thefrre cloaths it, and defends it from Wrongs.,Of tht U, licar, o. Alae'tfri yJi. They are in Number Four; One Vein, Two Arteries and the Veled which is called Urachs; of all which ap- part.,I. The Vein is the Nourilher of the Infant even from the beginning of the Conception, to the time of Delivery, till it breath Air and Conc6tt its Food as we do.,It arifeth from the Liver of the Child; and when it hath pailed the Navel it is divided into two Parts, and these two are again divided and subdivided, the Branches being up. held by the Sk:n called CEricn (of which more anon) and are joined to the Veins of the Mother's Womb, from whence they haye their Blood for the Nouriliment of the Child.,a. The Arteries are two, one on each fide, which proceed fiom the Iliac Branches of the great Artery of the Mother; by these is the Vital Bloodcarried to the Child, being ready concoaed by the Mother.,3. A Nervous or sinewy Produnifon is led from the bot- tom of the Bladder of the Infant to the Navel, and this is caled UraAe -an d its fe (as the Word fignfires, for we m* t u Greek Words, else bow flould we keep People in,Ignorance)
Ignorance) is to convey the Urine of the Infant from the Bladder to the Alatdois.,I confers various are the Opinions of Anatomifis concern- ing this, £ome denying any such things to be in the Delivery of Women, butonly in Beafs Some shew their Ignorance, i others their Skill in the Art of Disputation, and some few their Experience, which 1 lhall quote, Bartalemsw, Carbro- lius, a Chirurgion, and the ordinary Diffelor of the Ana- tomies to the College of Physicians at Mantiplier in Fraoe, records an. History of a Maid whose Water being a long time lopped; did at lad issue out through the Navel.,Jobn Fernelius, Pathol. Cap. 13. Records the like of a Man of 30 Years of Age, who having a foppage in the Neck of the Bladder, his Urine issued out of his Navel many Months together, and that without any Prejudice at all to his Health, which he ascribes to the ill tying of his Navel, whereby the Uraclvs was not well dried. Flckbier Coiter quotes fueh another, in a Maid of 34 Years of Age at Noremberg in G~rmy; I conses there are but fcldom, yet hereby may be proved such a thing as an Uracb in Men.,These four Vefels, to wit, one Vein, two Arteries, and the Uracbos, do join near to the Navel, and are united by a Skin which they have from Cborior, and so become like a Cut or Rope, and are altogether void of Senie, and this is that Women call the Narel-ftring. Women may if they please, when they have cut it off, take the Pains tb open it, and fee for their own Content, andthofe about them, that what I have written here is the TrBth.,The Veflels are thus joined together, that :o they Digiih neither be broken being fevered, nor entangled togetheri these when the Infant is born are of no use have only to mako up the Ligament which flops the hole of the Navel, and rome other Physical uses, which I may happen to teuchup- on before the end,Of tat Swc~ms. THE Grefs wfii this r& 9s m &r ar , the Lati,imitating thne, call them StcunZ , aud S uid ,,and
and our Women the Secundine, After-birth, and After-burden. They are in Numnber held to be four, where here I shall only describe and flew their use, and let the fcrming of them alone till I come t-; the next Chapter.,I. The firt is that which is callei Placnta, a kind of Latin Word given to a Sugar-Cake. because it resembles the Form of a Cake; it is knit both to the Navel and to the Ca~rioa, and makes up the greatest part of the Secundine, or After-birth.,The Flesh of it is like that of the Milt or Spleen, soft, red, and tending something to blackness, and hath very many finall Veins and Arteries in it; and certainly the chief ufc of it, is for the firmer containing the Child in the Womb.,2. Of the Cboria ; this Cdimbus denies to be Skin; you fee acute Men may be milfakcn, and if so, What an ill-fa. voured.Mafter Tradition is! whereas it is most certain that the Crisn and wi involve the Child round, Both above, and underneath, and on both fides; Jlatoil doth not so. The Skin, i~Pocatacommonly in his Book of the Difeafet of Women, calls the Secundine, or at leaf gives this parti- cular Name, the Secundine in general (whereas Claumbw millook this for the Placveta) it is a Skin thick and white, garnilhed with very many small Veins and Arteries ending an the Placnta, very light and slippery.,Its use is not only to cover the Child round about, but iso to relieve and safely bind up the Root, and the Veins IArteries, or Navel Vessels before described. 3. Of the .jar.toiJ: This some deny to be found in the Body of Mani and truly thosc that prove it to be there, prove it more by Reason than Experience. IfI had so ma- nyChildren in Hctlgdas I have had in Erglrd, I could have better certify'd you of the Truth of it; for in aUdall Men areprefentat their Wives Labours: They are delivered upon their Hulbands Laps, and not upon a Stool. Gaol said there was such a thing in Women as well as in Beafs, and the greatell part of our latter Writers have been no better than Gatn's Apes, and yet Gakn never saw Man-nor Woman Anatomized. However if it be, good Women may -id it if they look for it; it is, tey fay,,white
white and soft, and exceeding thin, and just under the Pla- cerna, where it's knit to the Urac'os, from which it receives the Urine, and its Office is to keep it feparatedfrom-the Sweat, that the faltrefs of it may not offend the tender Skin of the Child.,4. The lad covering of the Child yet remains, which is tailed Amnois; it is white, soft, thin and transparent, nou- rilhed by some very fmal! Veins and Arteries.,Its ule is not only to enwrap the Child round, but also to retain the Sweat of the Child: the use of which Sweat, I ihall haply touch upon hereafter. And thus much for the irft Chapter, viz.. The Parts pro- per to the Child.,

CHAP. IV. Tie Formation of tie Child in the Womb. Having spoken of the proper Part of the Child, welcome next to speak of its Formation; but before I be- gin this, give me leave to promise, that this is my difficult Piece of Work in the whole Book, nay in the whole Study of Anatomy, because such Anatomies are hard to be gotten; mod Women that lie on their Death, bedridden when they are with Child, miscarry before they die, if not all; besides, Galen never law a Woman Anatomized in his Lifetime, as I shall prove by and by (and yet our Anatomists follow him as a little God-a-mighty, and his ite deserve the turn; and so the Blind leading the Blind, you know what will become of them both) in the motivational in this Point that I know; the red, some follow Galkr,' some Vesalius, some their Fancies, and some Quibble about it.- Myself saw one Woman opened that died in Child bed, not delivered, and that is more by one than moR of our Doan have seen, yet they are confident as Asop's Crow was, that he was a' Eagle, but he was made a Mocking-tock to the Boys for his Labour; and so will they be shortly for their foolish Model of Physic, that I may give it no worse Name., And
	And then firstly, I hope you will give me leave to be a little Critical ; for there is need enough, if you knew but so much as I; if I commit any Failings they are unknown to me: Let the honesty of my Intentions deface them with a Dekatiur.,Nw tie Bia, si. T. The Testes or Stones of a Woman Womb are for Generation of Seed, where many times ticeJ, White. (if the Doctors and Chirurgeons were not high bale and denied your Admittance) you might feel it in an Anatomy, white, thick, and well concocted.,
	2. In the act of Copulation, the *Woman spends her Seed as well as the Man.; and both are united to make the Conception.,
	3. The reason why sometime.; a Male is conceived, some- times a Female, is the ftrcngth of the Seed: If'lyfimetines For if a Man's Sed- be firongeft, a Male is a Boy inCo- conceived; if the Woman's; a Female; the ceived, and greater Light obscures the lesser by the fame foiremetirncs a Rule, and that's the Reason weakly Men get Girl. most Girls, if they get any Children at all.,This shews a manifest Difference between Difference e- Nature and Appetite: Nature firivcs to between nature get its like, Men to beget Men, Women to and-fppetite. eget Women.; but for. Men to desire Girls, and Women Boys, is Appetite, not Nature: And yet you fee the Wisdom of most Men and Women, desire to plea-sure Appetite and not Nature, and so plainly make themselves Slaves to their own Sense. Experience /hews us, that a Girl of a Year old fancies Men more than Women, and Boys of the fame Age the contrary. If the Horse or Mare Trot, it were a Wonder if the Foal should Amble; and yet you fee also where Nature is wrong, it will vanquish Kjittie, do it the worn it can. 
	4 The Seed of both Sexes being united, the Womb in- flautly Ihuts up, partly to hinder the extram.iiion or passing out of the Seed, partly to cherilh the Seed by its unbred cat, the better to provoke it to Aftion. And that's the,Reason. Reason Womens Bellies are so lank.at their sirs Conception: Then inflantly Nature goes to work.,
	1. You must confider, that the firit thing which is Ope- rative in the Conception, is the Spirit, whereof the Seed is full: This Spirit Nature quickeneth by the Heat of ahe Womb, and flis it up to ACtion.,z. The feed1 though it seems to be but one Mass yet indeed it consists of very different Parts, of-which some are pure, Iome are impure: The. internal Spirit therefore feve- rcth thcef Parts, those that are thick, cold and clamy,.froa those that are pure and more noble: These are call to the outsides, and with these is the Seeds circled round, and'of there are the Membranes made, in which the pure Seed is wrapped r(und, and defended from cold and other Acci; dents, and kept close together, that so it may operate the better.,
	3. You may more than guess at the Truth of this, if you do but confider the growth of Trees, which is a very fami. liar Example (though heeded by few) for if you do but note it.,i. The cold of Winter congeals and putrifies the Vital Spirits in the Trees, which is again resolved in the Spring by the Heat of the Sun.,
	2 By this Nature opens the Pores of the Trees, and dif- tils Drops, always separating the pure from the impure ; of the pure it makes Flowers; of the impure, Leaves; and of the gross, Bark. Butto return again to our People.,1. The first thing that is formed, is the Skin Amnois, the next the Clhrion, and they enwrap the Seed round as a.Cur. tain: To let the idle Ideca of Arantius his Brain alone (who was of another Opinion) as not worthy of an Answer.,z. Very speedily after this (and- yet this is done in a very ihort time) left the Seed thus Ihut up filould corrupt or which is molt proper that it might not lie idle (for God and Nature hate Idleness) is the Navel-Vein bred, which pier- ce:h those Skins being yet ve.ry Tender, and carries a drop of Blood from the Veins of the Mother's Womb to the Seed, of which.Drop is formed the Liver, from which.Liver.is soon bred the IEaa Cava, or chief Vein, from which all the reft of the Veins that nouriih the Body spring,, and now,bath hath the Seed romething to nourish it, whilf it performs the ret of the Work, and also Blood adminifired to every Part of it to form the Flelh.,And now tell me I pray you, if this be not better Rca- son, than to hold all the Members arc formed together, as Man contend stoutly for and they nofJiall Soo neither; or if you like Tradition better than Reason, I will not rob you of t it; yo may take it, and walk a Fool in the Horn-fair * ith it; for I assure you, he that builds his Faith upon Tra- dition all Day, may fit down in the Chimney-corner at Night, and fcrach his Head with a pair of Fool's Nails.,And I pray tell me, if it be not learned Divinity which you hall .sometimes hear taught in Pulpits for Othodox, 7Iat lie Heart lves firjt, and dirs lap/, when the Liver lives, before the Heart is framed ? I weigh not a ruih the nier De- firidon of Anifotl, and the Poniatetidfs, nor of all the Fools that dance after their Pipes; how that firli a Man lives the Life of a Plant, then of a Beast, and after that of a Man. They know what the Life of a Plant is, as much as doth a Hobby-horse, and but little more. 'Tis the Com- municat:on of the God head to a Plant that makes it grow, though not in such a spiritual Way as he communicates him- lelf to Believers by the Person of Jesus Chrilt.,Prms;tem morlrat qu&libet Herha Deam. Every- Grass flews God is present with it, and'tis the withdrawing of God that makes it wither; this is that they ha-e no fcill in if they can get Money, they have gotten their De.Lre. Let them tell me the Reatbn of the Antipathy be- tween the Herbs Rue and Bafl, that one will not grow near another, and yet both Garden-Herbs; but what do I talk to a learned College ofPhyficians of Magnetic Vertues ? Talk to them how they hall raise their Fees from Ten Shillings to Twenty. I proceed.,
	3. This Vein being formed the Navel Arteries are soon as- ter formed, then the great Artery; of which all other are but branches, and then the lHl.rt, and so according to Co- mbAu, all the Arteries are formed before the Heart, aid good Reason too, for I told you before, that the Body was quickned by the Arteries, and that the Navel-Arteries were,red fom the Arteries of the Mother; good Reason then ‘ that they should be formed next, to give the Seed vital Blood for the forming and quickning of the Body; since now the Liver hath fitted them with Blood, as Matter to build óp this frail House of Flefl withal.,
	4. The next of all, the LiveFf.amilheth them with Blood to form the Heart: for the Arteries are made of Seed, but the Heart, as also all Flelh, of Blood.,S. After this the Brain is formed, then the Nerves to give Sense and Motion tothe Infant.,Here Aitifotk and the Ptripaatrti are an hundred AriftotA's Miles from the Truth. Judge if they do not make Fooklry. a Saving Veyage, that will needs have the Heart,formed sirs, and that the molt noble Part of the Body; whereas the Brain is a more noble Part, as being the Seat of Reason, and it must be also the Fountain of Blood; and many other Falfities, which I have heard Ministers deliver in a Pulpit, as confidently as Hogs will eat Acorns: Are such Ministers of God, I pray, or arifotlk,6. If you alk me which of the Bones be formed firt, I an. fwer, the Vertebra and Skull; of the Order of forming the relt;as also of forming the Flelh I am ignorant; AiRatl was of Opinion the Vertebra were firl formed of all the Bones, and there the Man hit the Nail on the Head.,To be a flilful Physician, study these Books of mine, viz. Platren, Senmertw, Riverit, Ri4lauw, Bartbalina, 7,bnfrw, Ve¥ingiw, &c.,

CHA P. III. An 4lUwtr tofowu nIdfrl iRetion about the Formation of tt,Cbildin tht Iomb. I N answering these, I hall anger ime, and f~me I Jal A facb l I~ Utli]ea olters and not dtJikat myself. Many and largchave the Disputes of the Ancient and Mo- dern Wfitrs been about Trics in this Cafe, which I hall willingly pas by. As,,t. W' Ether the Seed be the efficient aufe of our Forma. tion or not? -,2. Whether Women have Seed or not?,c 3. Whetbr
3. Whether it a& in Forming as well as the Seed osMan ? 4, Whether all the Members be formed together ? 5. Whether the Heart live firt ? o. Whether Seed flows from all Parts of the Body ? 7. Whether Seed of Sexes mull be presently mixed or not?,8. Whether this active Powerof Forming be in the Womb or not ? Witthe theand many other like frivolous Discourse have Authors 'for want of better Employment) blotted a Cart-load of Paper with, and spent that precious time in uch needless Disputes, which might have been better em- ployed, for the good of their Brethren. Only some need-,ful Quelions here arc to be answercd, which fte Form the I shall perform as briefly and plainiy as I Chid liie in, can. The first is this, What is the Form t..e Ia the l'omrb. CbijU lies in, in tbe N'cmb ? In 'what Fajl'isi,doth it lie there ? About this Authors cannot agree; not two of them in ten are of one Opinion. You fee what a woful Malter Traditi- an is, and what a miserable thing it is in Pficrk, as well as Di¢isbt, to pin one's Faith upon another Man's Sleeve, be he never so learned. I flall give you firlt Hippocratc's judgment, then CcLumbu, and lall of all a Figure out of igeliw.,Hippocrates in his Treatise De Vatur. P:eri, fccordzngts affirms the Child/as he is placed in the Womb, Hippocrates. to have his Hands, and his Knees, and his,Head bent down towards his Feet bs that he lies round together, his Hands upon both his Knees, and his Face between them, so that each Eye toucheth each Thumb, and his Nose betwixt his Knees. Of this Opi-,nion was Bart-.linus the younger. C'liunbus CnJ.s,',, holds that the Figure of the Cbildis round in,the Womb, the right Arm bowed the Fin- gers thereof under the Ear, and above the Neck, the Head bowed down, so that the Chin toucheth the Breast, the left Anm bowed above both Breast and Face, and the left Arm is propped up by the bending of the right Elbow, the Legs are l.fttd upwards, the right of Which is so lifted up,,that t'c Thigh toucheth the Belly, the Knees the Navel.
An Explication of the Figures, hewing the Diffeence ohe The Form the Chi lies the Womb, according to,Parts of a Childin the Womb, from those in a Perfli eats. the Opinion f Spigelius. 7ihe Second of the Figures ii this Plate, eew s the Form the Child lies in, in the This Table shews the Infant naked and difrobed of all its Tunicles,,TWcmb, according to. the Opinion of Hippocrates and Bartholinus. both Proper and Common. AA Tbhe Deputy Kidneys, or Vice Kidneys, l f ., AA heP ins he,lra-d er Latin Renes Succenturiau. ed and remve,zcba~~ CZC4'-.from the proper Place, BB The true Kidreys, as yet diftinguihed. srm , o ao *,sic S.rlao o aI~ Cblild as geit d~pingl~ B A Portiont of the Amnios. by divers Kernels; hbut i\ ,expre pJdinpint iA , CC The Membranes o f t e A os. of Situationbzy the Grazer's mijlake. . _ . Womb'x///-" ' cf~itucar~onl~ the lyteGI'r7 iJstate' ;h * \\ \C /rhe Ml ^embranes of the C Tihe grea.,rtriafrom whicb Branchesgo veed G D The P etia,,to tbcKidrenors. G DD Tbe Placent~ia, ser a to the Kidneys and Capsule orCases. certain y Subfance, in- D l'e Feda cav-a, fram whencefpring ite x --_--'~ I W]~; A certain fi{/hy Substance, in-,DThe Feda cava slm ~b ^H, f\in whr'ncesprin th i:^dued with very many FeTels, E uCap lgui e , and th.^ /e~i. hI Twigs of the by which the Infant receives Capfuix, or Cafe. iits Nouri/lnmnt.,~~~SI ~~~~~~~~~~~G. IT. / (--: '1 E The Farication ofthe yF/ Shews the Situation of a Child in the which make up the Navel- Womb, howbeit in some it differs, ( ft rg A bThe Head bending forward, Jo as the FirThN Nfe my be bid between the Knees. F Te Navel-ring, byaehica BB The Buttocks, to whbicb the Heels are Fes are car- CC The~ Arms:~t, U e r-,,-c-l./o:35.s--?~ '/,ft<' *i, ,^ I¢.<t WYried fr'om the Placenta to ID The Band or Rcpe carried along ty ile A GG Te Infant as it lieth per-,Neck, andbendcd '- pon tbe ForeeAd, seT in the of near tavel and continued- wi,. - e Placenta, oe.prcsed )T . . t Timde of Travel. in tie scalL. ing Figure, at tke Letter, D, I c . 'f the U i-,FIG. I . ',' AAA The )$'Mmbrane Chorion divided. V, '-.c .e of the Iant. BB Tih Amnios ,,,brane, as yet Mc'e-* ' ... . -o'f t s ~ing Ike Bard. CC Tibe inr tavepart of the Placenta ,,cr Ifrm Cake, which ies niext the Infant ': " wizh Twigs of the Veefels, '-- -7 D A Portion of the Band or tzcifed Rope. E-,FIG. IV. ~-', Expre/s the Outside cf the Womb-cake,,which ccaves to tbe Wcmb with (EEEE) * " the Clefts and Chinks therein wsicb vary in Refpeh? of Number and Depth. AMther's Wotrb ; which in very many,F I G. V. Particulars differs from that of a grown The Skleton of a Child as it is in the the Person, as is afparent.'
!i the Womb, according to Ds Spigelius. i and difrobed of all its Tunicles, .nd Common.,; AA 'tA e Prrti.sns of the Cho- -;..?\ .z."- rion di./ji'?:d add rcoved I:)': . 'L--', . %' fr;on 1t. prfpcr Plcr?, V/ ·. / -; B 1A )'ction of the Amnios.,S"'A ,; CC The Membrancs cf the,.z, I,, i s Isomb d.iT':lui, * li / DD qb e Placentia, being a r4 ',i A ce'rirun flii3Jfl Slfblance, in-,'19' Y ; drued with very many I'efls, Lb Xzt /' ~~-^ "' k:y lvwki the Infaint recisizcs a1 y/^ ^--N Uits lNoti'iJpiiitiNt.,;= .-*;; 8 ~E Th'e I 'rilation of the Veffecls,k / kwh" .ich make up the Navel- , wj ? st'rzg. vwhzch,:.li;}!;~~~~~ t^e car-,ta to 'I9a~~ \P«--x~~\per-,the vel .s"U
Heel. touchtth the left Buttock,. and the Foot is turned back and covereth the Secrets, the left Thigh toucheth the Belly. and the Leg is lifted up to the BreaR; the Back lies out- ward. . ',Lastly, I here insert you the Figure taken out f, Spigtlies, who quotes it but ofa Child Spigeius. prepared for the Birth, or when the Birth is near, and as far as I remember, that which I saw was like this.,InJert the -Figure here. My second Queition is, Hmu the Child ir noeri./$d ir tber IJ Gmb ?,Authors differ as much about this: I Ihall quote some of them, that none Ihould think I am critical without Cause against Antiquity, which our HRW,,uriffd. Nation, for want of more Wit, have ac- Miht WIomb. counted Venerable. ' : -,Almeon thought the Infant drew in his Nourifihmeri~t his whole Body ; becauCe it is rare and fpungy, as a Sp Di fucks in Water on every Side; and so he thought it ueclted Blood, not only from the Mother's Veins, but also from'tlih. Womb. ' ',Democrates and Epicurus, recorded by Plutarch, thatlibe Child fuck'd in its Nourishment by its Mouth.' And itS: Hippocrates. Lib. di Priniipiis, affirms, That the Child fuckid ' both Nourishment and Breath by its Mouth from the Mo- ther when Ihe breathed, (though in his: other Treatises: he seems to deny it) yet there he brings two reasons for it': 1. Bccaufe it fucks so foon-as it's Born, therefore it needs must- have Learned before. z. Because there are Excrementb found in the Guts of it so soon as 'tis born. -'-:,To the firlt I answer thus, It learns to fuck :, Naatwr In/lind. Take a young Cat that never saw her D4az catch a Mouse, yet will Rhe catch Mite so soon as ihe is able: Mult ihe needs therefore flck Mice from her Dam when The was-in her Belly ?- And yet this Argument of Hippterarts, will fen-efor such a Priest as denies any such thing as Na- tural IvJina (of-which I know some! to teach-in the Pulpit for Authentick. .......,- ' C To.
To this fcond Reason I answer thus, That thef are not Excrements of the frft ConcoAtion; and that I prove, be- cause they flunk not, but are the thickest Blood conveyd. from the Vessels of the Spleen to the Guts, and there driven into that Form. All thee being as far of from the Trqth, as Do.er is from the LizardPoint: We mull find anew Way for the Child's Nourihmnent; and theTruth is, all Modern Writers agree, the Child receives its Nourilhment by its Navel; but what the natural Nouriflment of the Child, they also keep an old pother about, and defend and prove about, like Lawyers, and all to no purpefe in the World.,Aridotle and the Peripa~tics, and Magrins from them, held itto be nourilihed in the Womb by the Woman's Men-,Others, as Calmlsla, Pliny, Colhmus, and Fre/lius, they deny the Child to be nourished by Menltruous Blood; and tir reasons are, because it is impure, and this Impurity they prove, becaufc itkills tender Herbs, makes Trees bar. zen, and Dogs mad, and hurts the Women themselves, ma- ny ways causing Pains, Swelling, Vomiting, loss of Appe- -tite, Vertigo, the Fits of the Mother, and over sharp and cruel Difeafi s of the Womb; and therefore being thus evil, they are not fit Nourilhment for the Child. A very learned Difprte for a couple of Boys of seven Years old a piece to decide. For,,a. This Blood which a Woman voided once a Month, is not o bad as they make it to be; nay, simply in its self confiderd, not bad at all, but very good; for if the Wo- man's Body be in good Temper, the Blood must needs be goo; and the reason why hme voids it, is, because it of-,in quantity, not because it offends in quality; but if the Woman's Body be vicious, the Blood which remains in it is vidos, .as wel as what is caltout.,z. It is not pply the aMei*na's *which produce those dangerorus Effcs they talk of; but the Mefrranl s flopped beyond their due time, and by Stoppage corrupted, and by Corrution are these ill Effects they tik of produced; and i is a betterArgument to prove them very g ood Bod,than
than very bad; for the best of Things when corrupt, prove the worf. But,,3. What need all this quoil have been ?. We all know that it is called [Metnfrua's] because it Is caf out Monthly; and we know that Women have them not the greatefl Part of the time they go with Child, nor most Women when they give fuck: And if the Child be not nourished with th;e lame Blood in the one, and it be converted into Milk in the other, what becomes of it ? It seems then this cavelling is rather about the Word [Mefrztna's] or about the Blood re- tained above a Month before Conception, than about any material thing in the Business: But I have done.,I come now to the Answer of the Quefion, and yet let me tell you first of another of Hippocrates his Absurdities, 'viz. That the latter time of the remaining, or the Child in the Womb after it is quick, it is nourilhed partly by the Mother's IVilk; you may find in his Book DerNatura Puze ; it deserves not an Answer, being just as probable as that a. Millione can swim.,The Truth is the Child is nouriflied in the Womb by .vc- ry pure Blood, conveyed into the Liver by the Navel-Vein, which is a Branch of the /ema Pora. or Gate-Vein, and. paffeth to the fmill Veins of the Liver:. Here this Blood is. more purified, and the thicker and rawer part of-it is con- veyed to the Spleen and Kidnies; the thick Excrement of. it to the Guts, which is that Excrement found, there t'o soon as they'are born. The pure part is conveyed to the g'v Cawa, or hollow. Vein, and by it distributed throughout the-Body by the small Veins, which like small Rivulets pafsto. every Part of it. This Blood is accompanied with acertain watry Substance, as all Blocl is better to convey it through the Passages it is to run in, which, as in Men is breath'd out by Sweating, and contained in the Annois, as I told you before. I have done with this Question, after I have Ihew'4 you that there is a certain watry Subtnce in white Blood is tent to the Kidnies, and from the Kidnies is this sent by the U- reters to the Bladder: Neither doth an Infant oid his Urine by his Privities, but it is conveyed to the AUlaitois by the Urachos, (which I described before) which is long and bloodless, and pafleth from the Bottom of the Bladder to,C 3 ' the .astis; neither hath it any Muscle belonging to it, feeing no time unseasonable to the Infant in the Womb to void its Water, whereas we have Muscles at the Root of the Yard, to flop and open, that we might follow our Business, and not always be Pffiing.,And thus you have, ;. In what Form the Child lies. a. How i: is nourilhed in the Womb.,

SEC T. II. TLer Sensation of te Cild in tie Ifomb Ajfrologically handled. i. IT cannot be denied, but that the Stars and Elements,have a mutual Sympathy one with another, because they are produced out of one and the fame Chaos.,z. The lmentary Bodies are in Subjetion to the Cklefill because, Obediace is to fond in the Elementary World.,3. That there mull needs be Microcofmiral Stars in the Bo- dy of Man, because he is an exact Epitome of the Creation.,4. That this Microcofivical Sun, Mlaon and Start, muff be -Aive, and the Elestary Part of the Body of Man palfive, appears. because the Celepial Bodies are not changed, but remain the very fame. Now there were at the Creati- on but Elemntary Bodies always increase or decrease, and never stand at a Stay; hence then it will come to pass, which all (unless Cavillers) will confers, that as theC&re/lia/ Bodies in the Mirccfm induce the Form, and the Elreni~ary World fubminifiers Matter for this Form; so also they mull of Necefiity do in the Microccnm.,5. To present this more clearly before your Eyes as a Truth, take notice, that the Womb of a Woman is under aortio; for under iorgs it cannot be,- because Yirgo is a bar- ren Sign: And here by the way, that few or no Writers that ever yet could read, could give any Reason why Sorpi is a fruitful Sign; they tell you a long Tale of a Tub con- terning the reft of the Signs, as that L-o is a barren Sign, becanil Lions seldom bring forth Young. But why hould not 'Taurus be a barren Sign ?for Bulls never bring forth Yourg; and .--;ie is not Fruitful. beaufe is it thi: Houle-of,Mars,
Mnars and why then should Scorpio, which is the House of Mars also ? The Truth is (to let the Fiitions of Authors pass) Srof/lo is a fruitful Sign,- because it rules theeWonmb: And CGricer and Pilce, are fruitful, because they are of the fatn Tpiplicity. But to proceed:,That every Planet hath Influence in the Generation of Man, appears bv this Table.,Let them that wotild be learned Physicians, read theft: Books of mine, viz. Platers, Senerrtut, .Rverius, Riolanui, 1. ; t]'., 5it/i r, ahw y'i"i;n, &c.,The able i: this.  Every Planet is said to rule particular Parts of the Body, nMd fcveral Parts, according to e..ch Sign he is in. All Au. thors have left Tables of this, and all falle. I at firit desiring a Reason of this Table, found ou:t in about half an Hour's iludyv, thai every Planet ruled the Ilead when he was isn his o0:. Iloufc, and the Neck in the House succeeding; but this, widen I could not firid it agree with the Writings of other Authors ( with their Tables of Nature I rncan ) 1 was firitat - a little fland ; confidering a Man had as good rut hisWits an,C 4 Apprentice to a Man of Bedlam, as make them Slaves to Tra- ditic, I drew out a Table in another Form, which presently gave me as much SatisfaCtion as I dtfired; so much as be- longs to my present Argument I fiall here quote. You Ihall find that every Planet in Scrftio governs the Parts of the Body which are under the fame Signs which he is Lord of, the Lu- minaries excerted, which do it by Reception, is an evident Teflimony that they have Influence in forming the Child in the Womb ; as also there is a mixture of the Influence of the Luminaries in that Action.,Let this fuAfce to have proved, that the Planet have an Influence even upon the Conception in the Womb; rwe come now to mhew you.,I. What Authors fay concerning the thing. 2. What indeed the Truth is. I. What Authors. The frlt Month of the Conception they give to Saturn, by whose Influence and retentive Faculty they fay the Seed is faitned in the Womb.,a. The second Month they attribute to Jupiter, by whose Influence they fay the Foundation of Growth, Sense and Undertanding is laid; whereas the Foundation of all is laid in the Commixture of the Seed in both Sexes; the Man is then formed in rteu; inpo f, though not in crb.,;. The third Month they give to Mars, and he they fay gives Heat and Motion to the Child; but if it wanted Heat before, how could it live till that time ? I'is but a frigid Argument, to think Life can be maintained by cold.,4. Then the Syn challengeth the fourth Month they fay, and he fwai~heth the Child with vital Spirit, but Mars gave it Motion a Month before; and was ever voluntary Motion to be known without vital Spirit ?,5. Then comes Veaw, and 1he in the fifth Month gives the Child Comeliness and Beauty; but by their Leave, if they take comeliness for falhion of Body, that it hath long before; for the Body is falhioned in thirty or forty Days as all hold; but if for dearness of Skin that appears not till the Child be of some Age, namely a Year or mere.,6. Mar~ y, he hath the sixth Month appropriated to him in which time they lay, he separates apd difinguifheth the, Members of the Child, which were before connexed;. This is such a peice ofBufanefs Man knows not what to think of, much less what to make of; if they mean by dillinguilhing the Members, the breaking oftheic Skins which wrap the Child round in the Womb, viz. theyWo, ',Ao,, they are not broken before the time of the Woman's Labour; if they dream that the Members or Limbs of the Child are in a Cbaow before, this is but a Dream waking; and as simple a Bufmefs as it is to believe that they are tied together by Ligaments &ic. (for to write like a Scholar, for I write now to Altrologers, who mhould be Scholars if they are not) it is ridiculous, and de- clines as much from the Truth, as the Polts of the World do from the Egquar, that any one Ihould think that those Limbs of the Child that now are separated, Ihould formerly be joined together, either by Enartbrofis, Arthrodia, Gynglymos, Harmonia, Sutua, G;onptofi, Sincriondrciis, Sinneurojfi, or Syarrof/r.,7. And then the Moon mull come to make up another Er- ror in the Work, and she mall have the seventh Month be.- itowed upon her, in which they fay compleats the Child,. which was ju;: as conpleat five Months before.,2. To lhew you the Truth of the Business. Authors fail not so much in the Operation of the Planets, as they dorn the time in allotting the Planets what theyemull do every Month; whereas indeed they all operate together. at the fame time, but if all the re;t of the Planets Ihould lie; tiill wh.le one works, what a mad peice of Work would they make ? A Man had as good affirm, that every Planet novcthb his Month, and all the reit Rand fill the while. Philosophy, teacheth Men that Motion is the Caufc of Change; for it is the Motion of the San, or else of the Earth that causes Day- and Night. But that we nmay be Methodical in laying down the true and genuine Operation of the Planetary Influence in this Act of conception: We /hail speak of each Planet by it self.,&. The Sun, is well known to every one, gives Heat to the World: And if so, then also to the Body of Man, be- cause our Life confius chiefly by Heat, which animates the Moilture, so that the Sun mull needs be the Author of Life, and Father of all living creatures, and therefore muil of n:- ceflity be firt formed in the Seed of both Sexes, being mixed,C5 in
in refpee of Order, if not in refpea of Time: He is fonned in the very midlt of the Seed, from whence he quickens, in. igires, and moves every Part to its paticular Adion. Indeed what 'Arifftle attributes to the Heart in' the Generarion of Man is very tre, it he had spoken of the Microfirsical Sun, and therefore some real Philosophers (I scarce darereckon rij/htle in the Number of them ) having 'imagined that the Seat of the Microcofmical Sthe the Body of Man was the Heart; vet I can scarce be of that Opinion that the Micr&rif- ircalSar and Moon, which Reign like King and Queen in the Body, Ihould be confined to any particular Place, however the Otfice of the Mcrscofmiel Sti both in and aftercoieepti- on is to give vital Spirit, and Fir up all things to 3;otion and Atiion;,z. As theWater moiftensthe Earth that so it might not be burnt up by the scorching Heat of the CGrlfial Sun; so the Murocitoical- imo adds Moisture to the Conception from the -very beginning of the Emrrre, even to the utmost term of Liif ; and this is that which.'they call Radi-i.l-fci/l re, a fa- miliar Term amonglt all Pfricians, yet underitood by very few. Some Pbilotplers areof Opinion, that the Mierorfmical ~n keeps her Rcfidence in the Brain,and that's the Reason Ajfisl-ts earthly, dull Philosophy, held that the Brains coot- ed the Heart; but how or which way, neither himflf, nor any Body else can tell. 'Tis some invisible business which had i Otiginal from the Brain-sick Humour of an idle Philofb- pher. Bu out of qjeflion, the Micrvefrmiral-r.on is not con- fed to any one Part of the Body, but is uniterfafy in it as aSca/dl-mo/aiu is. Indeed the truth is, as the Sun gives Heat, lb the Mew gives Moisture: And that is the'Reafon the Gc- neration of'l hings is held to be- om Heat and Moisture; and if so (which is molt certain ) what an admirable fantaf- rica3 Dream was that of Ariftot, that the Brain was cold and moit?,3. There mut be something to ceonterpoife the Heat of the Sno, and Moiture of the Moon, and this muf be by a Pianet contrary to them both, else it could not be done, which Office Satan performs; for he fixes and lays the Beams of the Mi.rwomicalSwU and Meoo, that so Generation may be made. You knew Shoemakers nail on their Shoes to,the
the Last before they) cn f f t o them; die bones are also framed by'his Iifluence,' , y which this: frail concetion is upheld and Rrayed aftrr it is born.,4. There can be- ri";Gene'ration without Putrefa&iott, therefore what Ra-s the LuariCs 'let fail upon the Seed, and Saturn hath fixed J7aittr, by his Hear and Moisture pu- trifles and conco&s, and by his equal Temper preserves a Harmony in it.,5. As all things are bred by leat and MoiRure, and fixed by coldness and dryness; Ib tle Generation of Man, there most needs be some exfuperance and abounding; this Miar-Js heats, exhales and converts both into'Excrements, and also hardens into coverings of the Embryon : Indeed his -qeat is a drying, burning, calcining Nature; for all things are made better and purer by Calcination; so inleed is the EXi'rTo in the Womb made fit for growth by the Ieat of 6. We told you all Generation was performed by Heat and Moiflure, tler.eore as Mmrs. Heats and Calcines the Embi,-c, so A'ens moistens it. And here you have the Rea- tobas.,I. lWhy inII being a cold and moiR Planet should bethe .Author of Generation, feeing all Generation is performed by Heat and Moiflurc indeed ffhe doth but only add MoiP- ture to the Heat of Mas. - ',2. Confidering what Antipathy there is between ?fan and iinius, and yet what a Sympathy they have in the Ge- ieration of Man; and fee the Reason of that Sympathy and. Antipathy of things generated.,3. Seeing all things are generated by a Corruption of the contrary Qualities, you need not ask the Reason why Man being so generated mufi in time come o Corruption.,4. You fee here the Reason of those Poetical Ficlions that Mars and Venus were so often tur.d in Adultery, be- cause they perform the very fame Office in. the Generation of Man.,;. It is Proof enough to me, that allrs ard Vrei do perform this Afion of the Conception of Man, because their Bodies in the Heavens are neareR of all thie si Pli- nets of the Gibl; to this our Terreflial Star.,6. AMerewrn
6. lerairbeag of a mutable Nature, often applying to theS and IAr, and the Planets; Memr maketh the fenibe, and (some fay; rational Part in Man, and so befows Sne and Reason upon the Emnio; in Deed and Truth, he bellows fucb a penetrating and acute Humour upon the Esiq, which firs up to Contemplation, inquir- ing after the Reasons of Things; for be caufeth that inbred Deir of Knowledge which is in the Sons of Men: Only here is one thing which fecms worth the Answering, which is That thole that are born in the seventh Month, may live by Reason of the Complement, fulfilling of the Planetary Motions; but such as are born in the eighth Month, are ei- ther born dead, or live but a very little while, because the Di4ofiution or Government of the Conception is turned back to Satanr, who (they- fay) is inimical to Nature in all khi Quities.,To this I Answer; a. Soa~ is inimical to none but to such as know not his Onalitiesr for he cannot endure ignorant Puppies.,2. 'Tis not the Complement of seven Planets that makes a Child live, born at the fcventh Month, but the perfeaion of the Number [S.vea] which, if I were writing Divinity, I could prove by Scripture to be the perfeaeRt Number that Is.,3. Lffporatu may be mifiaken in his Book De Principiis, and in that Dc O;a2ime/ri Paru, and in that De Alimento; in all which he goes about to prove, That a Child born in the eighth Month cannot li-e, Galen, Ar.'otle, PlWa,rch, and Others, that wrote the fame things after him, might be but his Apes; for the Writers of E pt, Spaiu, and those of Nvxsr, they affirm, that Children born in the eighth Month have lived: Set one againrt the other.,4. There may be ome difference about Hippocrates his Months, tiz. Whether they were Solar or Lnar. A Solar Month is the Time in which the SXu is transfiing one of the Signs of the Zaoac, and is very near thirty, or thirty one Days throughout the Year.,A
A Lunar Month is the time that the Moox traceth through the Zofua, and confilfti of 27 Days, some odd !Hours, and some odd Minutes.,5. The Women they wrote of, might be a Month mif- taken of their Reckoning;, that is as easily done, and as often by some, as a Woman can mistake one Shoe for ano- ther in the dark.,6. If the Office of Saturn be to retain the Seed in the Womb the firfi Month, who caufeth the Expulsion of the Child in the eighth, which they attribute to him also ? Is Saturn so old that he has loft his retentive Faculty ?,They that would be knowing Physicians, let them Rfdy there Books of mine, viz. Platerw, Straertui, Riveriw, Rio- Janus, Boartolinusn, YJhtlo, Veftingiw, Ruiaadwr, Fenrtti, SanlStr.,BOOK III. Of what inders Conception, together with it Re-,medies. TT is mod certain, that all Men and Women desire Chil- -dren, partly because they are Blefiings of'God, andfo Saints desire them, PJal. 1a7. 3. Ls Cbiirei are an Herirta of the Lord, and the Won is his Rtward. As also Pfal. 18. from the beginning to the latter end, prove it. Or else be- cause they are pretty things to play withal, every like defir- ing to play with its like. Or laftiy, and molt probably, Lust is the Cause of begetting more Children than the desire of the Blessings of God; for where the desire for Children moves one to the Ad of Copulation, the Pleasure in the Aft moves an hundred, and such corrupt Principles prove usually Baseness in the middle, and Bitterness in the latter end, to those that use them. It being apparent by the Curse of God upon Ewve, I muill exceeri ; ,gl , mrhuti the Cnception; that many Children come into the World as a Curse. But,1
I am not now to aft the part ofa'DivYne but of a Physician, and therefore tb'ihe Purpose in hand. .,i'K.at inderr QmCeptian, cafetb Barreaneli.,C I. Natural. Barrennf is ta 2. rccidertal.,3. 3- gaifRl Aaturte. Of each of these in a Sedion by itself.,SECT. I. - . . Of Nlatura Barrur.tefi. 'ATURAL Barrenness, I call that which caufeth Bar-,renness in a Woman; the Inftrumcnts of Generation being perfec in both herself and her Hurband, no prepof- terous or diabolical CourfT used to cauire it, yet the Woman remains naturally barren; neither Age nor natural Dcfedt, and Diseases impediting, yet Ihe conceirce not. - To find out all the Renfairf of this, requires a fironger Head-piece than I have; yet what the Lord hath imp:arted unto me, I shall freely impart to you.,I. The Man and the Wife that are both of one Complcx. ion, seldom have Children ; and the Reason is clear from the nniverfal course of Nature, which being formed by ;i All-wife God, of a compofiion of Cozutraries, cannont be increased by a Cbmpofition of likes; and although to find two People ijnf in every particul.ar of a Complex:on, be a Syflem happily toorare to find, or very seldom found; yet if they be very near of a Complexion, my Reason will.hold good, and I knew no Remcdy for it; unless thev l,.ould Part; for if the main cause of Marriage be the Procreation of Children, I know not bat that Marriage which dcnies this may be unlawful. The Trth is, Marriage is the great- eft natural AAion of Man's Life, and he that waits upon God for his Diretrion in it, fiall not do amiss.,z. Want of Love between Man and Wife is ano:hex cause of Barrenness. That therels an essential, vitalSpirit iu the Seed of both Sexes is without ali Question: (And that made up the Bas:s cf Oc.ai.s Sin mentionedin Scrin - tare, in spiling his Seed; the other as circumances, dt,,b;;;
but aggravate it, for this God flew him. I believe God hath been more merciful to many in' Englard in the fame cafe,' yet he is as juti now as he was in Ona' s Days. Then secondly, that this Seed participates'of ihe Naiture of both Sexes, is very clear,'by Mens begetting their -like, u'iz. Men and Women beget Men and Women; then if their Hearts be not united in Lore, how' liould their Seed unite to cause conception ? It is reported of two Thiban Princes, Ettrorts and Pop)nices, both BrotheYs, yet a miortal Hatied between them, that having fain one, another in'Batte, when their Bodies were burned (for in those Days and Places they burned the dead Corps, and entombed only their A'ihes) that the Fire parted in the middle and went up in two Tops, and if there were such a mummial Hatred in their Dead corps, greater must the Hatred be in the Seed of twvo difa. greeing Sexes, because it hath more Spirit.in it; and this is the Reason therenever comes conception upon Rapes'" -,It is a fad thing Men should take Women for theirFriepds that did love them, and then hate theri.: And as. fad; that Women when they are Married, ihduld either through Pride or Folly, 'or something else, so forget themselves, their Hulbands, and their God, that they cannot live quietly isith them; and worse than either (if worse can be) is that trick of Parents, to compel their Children to Marry againit their Minds; such corrupt beginnings, ufuallv bring Sorrow enough' to all Parties that use them, gr have a faind in tiem.; and that they all know by that time they have counted the middle and both ends.,3 A -third cause of natural Barrenness is, the letting of Virgins Blood in the Arm before tl eir courses come-down Theie come down in Virgins usually in the fourteenth Year of their Age, seldom before the thirteenth. ever' before the twelfth: And because usually all young Virgins are out of frame before they first break down, the Mother takes the Daughter's Piss, and away to Dolor Duwct runs Ihe, who knowing something by her Water, as much as he could if he looked in a Crow's Nest, and gathering by the Mother's Talk, arid by feeing the Party, that fulness of Blood of- fended, straight prescribes Blood-letting in the Arm (Bleed- ing and Purging, and Purging and Vomitting, being all the,Medicines,r·-
Medicines that many country Physicians to my Knowledge have Skill in,'or commonly use) they go whip Difeifes.out of the Body, as &Srxtr's whip Dogr out of the Church, (tbis is done, and then Ihe is well for a time, the fuperflu- ous blood being taken away; the next Year (if Ihe 'ay so long) be falls in the fame cafe, then the other bout of bleed- inge and in three or kur times lo serving, especially if the Maid use much exercise, the blood comes not down to the Womb as it doth in other Women, but the Womb dries up, and becomes for ever barren.,For preventing this for time to come, let no Virgin be let blood m the Arm before their Mefirua's come well down (cafes of Necessity excepted) 'but rather in the' oot; for that provokes the blood downward, and by that Means it provokes the Terms.,.4 A fourth cause of natural barrenness, is loss of carnal Copulation; Men and Women come to the School of Yenus, ither.not at all, or so frigidly, that as good never as whit, . never the better.,This is perpetually caused of a cold Distemper, and mutl be cured by such things as heat and nourish.,For tY cure. Let such eat and drink of the' bell; Sine Crere & Liberofriget Venuw, faith the Latin Proverb: With- out good Meat and good Drink, Penus will be frozen to Death. Wholesome Food for such, are Cock-ftones, Lamb-ftones, Sparrows, Partridges, Quails, 'heafants-eggs;' ani tae this for an Aphorimn of Trrth, both in this Diet, and all other parts of Phyfick; g'hatetrw a nr o 'ra- turt it aiddred extremey to, t£9y mcae the AC'j that eats tl.m If the lie their r-umirrial Virtue. Therefore Partridges, Quails, Sparrows, &c. being exceedingly addicted to Vcne- , they work the fame in those Men and Women that eat them. I will give you another, LoAk in what parts of the BSay tle FSCdy v-tcSrbcu Iw.a3 fIrengtbn lies, and take the fame part of tV Bal of anctrer Creature, in Salhem tl-e Faculty is fircing, at M/didm. For Example, the Virtue procreates lives in the TetLicls, therefore Cock-olnes, c,. are Medicinal for this Dickafe.,I
I have written enough of this to wife Men; but because all Men are not so, neither do I know Rfer/j, when they will, I /hall quote some few Receipts. ,,i. Let such often eat windy Meats, eipecially fgch as notrifh much, as Parineps, Alexanders, Skirerts, Pine- nuts, &c.,2. Let them take a Dram of the Eleauary Diafayricn every Morning. You may find the way how to make it in my Translation of the London Dijfnfatorj.,3. The Stones of a Fox dried to Powder, and a Dram taken every Morning in Mukadel.,4. A Dram of Sat.yrio Roots taken in the like Manner. But because I shall touch much upon this in the next Book, I pass it here. And thus much for this Section.,SEC T. II; Of Accidental Bartnmrs. call that Accidental Barrenness, which come by Reason of some casual Infirmity upon the body of the Manor his Wife at a time, which being taken away, the Eff ceafeth.,This is Sometimes caused by the Man's part, but moil commonly on the Woman's.,Then what I am here to speak to is, Barrenii caiJdg some caufr wbich may ecajr bL Correded and Ra&eid.. : .',Authors have left ways to know, whether the cafeof bar- renness lie in the Man on in the Woman, and Hi~erait was very busy about it; hut because I cannot conide in his Judgment, I lhall pass it by in silence.,The mod rational way of Knowledge in this Point that. ever I read in this cafe, I shall quote, and give my Reason for it; if it do hold true, well and good; if not, I cannot help it, for I never tried. It is this;,Take a Handful of Bariy (any other Corn that will quickly grow will serve the turn as well) and seep half of it in the Urine of the Man, and the other half in the Urin of the Woman,- the space of four and twenty Hours, then take it out and set it, the Man's byitfelf, and the Woman's,- h
by itself, set it in a Flower-pot or something else where you may keep it dry, Ihen Water the Man's every Morning with his own Urine, the Woman's with hers, and that which grows firlis the greatest sign of Fruitfulness, if one grow notat all, they are naturally barren, fay Authors; for my Part I do not bind any Man to believe it, yet this 1 fay, all Men and Women desire to be Fruitful, and the Urine of one that is Fruitful (probably) is more likely to make a Seed grow, than the Urine of one that is not Fruitful, because here is a Principle of Fruitfulhefs in the one, not so in the other; and every Man knows (that doth but know hi. Right Hand from his Left) that Urine is essential to the Body of ever) one: And if it can Thew Disease, why not as well Fruitflnefs and its contrary ?,But to proceed; Sartwnes Accidextal is either common to both Man and Wife, i. e. cithet of them may he troubled with the Infirmi- ty. or else it is proper to the Woman onlv, this (as I told you) is molt frequent; neither is it my Purpose here to speak f Diaes incident to Men, which may cause Barrennels for the time being, but of such as properly cause it; for the lftnments of Generation in Man being perfeA, his Diet and Exercise according to Rule, which the rfl Book hath ready, and the next Book shall further infiruCt you in. I know no accidental Cause of Barrenness in him, if his Bo- dy be in Health.,The chief caafe of Ba-rennefs in a Woman lies in her Womb, and its Infirmities, which what -they are, their Canfe, Signs and Cure, you Ihall find in Order presented to your View,,1. Of JIftssg oftheM-l-rwa':. 2. Of ctrtisig of iev MeflrwIs. 3. Of te Flxr ,f the r.b. 4. Of filing nut of lte W11n. 3. Of hfimantia of the WCcmb. 6. Of 3fir0ii/s of tl-e anmb. 7: Of Hr'st ad Drirfr of the U'cm.,Of there in Order.,C H A P.
CH A P. I. Of th~./oppage es ste lciJsIrua's. T J E kitflriia's flop in a Woman.,I. atizirallr. 2. ~gainfi Naum't. To know the Difference between these, vou 'niut have re- gard to the Age of the Party: In many the Aletrrua's ap- pear not till after the fourteenth Year, in' ew before, in none till after twelve. They flop naturally in some Women about the Soth Year of their Age, in fonie before; they continue in very few Women after the five and fiftieth.,When they flop through Age, the Woman is pa 'Child- bearing, not before, for then it ceafeth to be with her after the Cuflom of Women.,1. Such'as use themselves to much Exercises, have but few'of them, but those few are very good CGzui. Blood; and the Reason why they have but few, is because the Blood is consumed by Exercise.,2. Again many times, they are flopped in immoderate fat People, for their Veins are narrow, 'and that little B1oo0 they have is turned into Fat. . -. Such as are waRed by continual Sickness have but little superfluous Blood in them. -,'4. Sometimes they are flopped by reason the Womanhath the Hxmorrhoids or Piles at the Time.,S. Sometirmes they fly up to some Sore or Ulcers in the Body, as happens to such Women as have a. Canker intheir Breads. These I note'but by the by. .But..,6. Sometimes either a hot or cold Dileperfl.fthe'Womb itself caifeth it. And -,7. Care, Fear, Sorrow and Grief cause it. .. My present Scope is only to speak of the two latter,; and more particularly of e fa for thCau of elafaone, for ththe lall being taken away, Effecs cease. .,The general Signs of a Woman molesed- with SigsJ g- this Disease are Heaviness ofithe whole Body, aeral.,Proneness
Pronnecf to Vomit, Loathing of Meat, and certain Tremb- lings, such as happen to Women with Child, Pains in the Back, and sometimes in their Stomach and Neck, and Breast, the hinder part of the Eyes, and the fore part of the Head, and Sometimes their Body fwcl!s.,Tile diversity of the Cafe may be partly Particuli.. known by the relation of the Sick. A cool,Distemper is known by Dulness, Sleepincfs, Slowness inMoving, a Pale, Whitely, Leaden Colour A hot Difenmper is known by the contrary Signs. I am no way ignorant of the ways the Ancients used for the cure of this Difetfe in Women; because I like them iot,, I shall make bold to leave them out, and insert my own, for which I hall give my reasons. Confidering that the lfopping of the Mefna's come thro' default in the Womb usually, the bftway to help it, is by rengthening the Womb. I shall give you frit the way of Cure.,Secondly, Cautions in using it.,I. Let the Patient So grieved Sweat; for that Cav. opens the Pores. The bcet way is to Sweat in a,Hot-House. a. Let the Womb be flrengthened by drinking a draught of White-wine, wherein an handful of stinking Arach being firt braised, hath been boiled; the Herb is common, it rows alihoft upon every btng-hill throughout the Nation. It by a secret, Magnetic Virtue itrcngthens the Womb, and by Sympathy removes any Disease thereof.,3. If there be together with this Infirmity Pains in the Head, as usually there is, for there is great Sympathy be- tween the Head, and the Womb, and that's the reason all Cephalic Herbs almot strengthen the Womb, add a handful of ervtar to it, which by a like Magnetic Virtue ltrength- cns both Womb and Head.,4. This being used two or three Days, if they. come not down: Take of Calaminth, Pennyroyal, Thyme, Mother of Thyme, Bettony, Dittany, Burnet, Feather-sew, Mug- wort, Sage, Piony-roots (the Female are bes in-this caie, let Man part their Plealbre) Juniper-berries; half an hand- ful of there, or so many of them as can be gotten, boiled in Beer, and drank for ordinary Drink.,e. Take JaC
5. Take one part of Gentian, two parts of Centauryr Ditlil them with Ale in an ,Aleebec, iaftr, ywo have bruile the Gentian roots, and infused them well: This water is an admirable Remedy, not only toprovoke the Tqrims, total- so to resist the Pelfilepee, to hbilp fthis. in the St9mach, the Spleen, to P.rge not only the Womb, but alib the bo- dy of Choleric and Corrupt. Humours. If so be youhave not this Water in a readiness, Take a dram of Centaury, and half a dram of Gentian Roots, beat them to Powder, take it in the Morning in White wine; or you may boil an handful of Centaury, and half a handful of Gentian Roots bruited, and boil it in Posset drink, and brink a draught of it at Night going to bed.,6. The Seed of wild Navew beaten to Powder, and a dram of it taken in the Morning in White-wine, doth the like.,6. Alexander-roots bruised and boyled in the like man- ner, perform the fame Office; other Simples which are Medicinal, are the roots of Partly, Fennel and Lovage, Angelica-roots, the Herbs of Chervil, Mafter-wort and Sage, perform the fame : you may use them at your Difcre- tion.,If this do not the dead, you mull let themr Blood in the Legs.,CAUTIO NS. Caut. i. Give not any of those to any thatis with Chi!d, left you turn Murtherers, wilful Murther seldom goes un- punilhed in this World, never in that to come.,z. Give your Medicines a little before the Full Moon, or between the New and full Moon, for then blood encreaf- eth, but never in the Wane of the Moon; for if you do, you had as good give them to an Oak The Moon hath great influence upon all Elementary bodies, but more upon Women than Men, because they are of her own Sex.,3. Let the Pitient use much Exercise; 4. If thelody:be troubled with evil hniours, let.threm be purged out. The third Chapter will-inflruf you how.,5. Sometimes
5. Sometimes (though but seldom) they are flopped throuh fideis. This is known by vehement Pains about their Reins, their Veins are (follen, and they are such Peo- p as live idly, and:abound in blood.' ' .,Such mlt be cured by blee'ding in the Arnrm for fulness ca~th distention or frethiin, ," and distention hinders ex- tramimio: Ahi bleeding in thie'Footnmakes the diflention greater, 'as was well noted by Dr. 'Riaeriui, Physician to the Frhcb King.,But let itis be done with good Advice, and great Wari ne5s. -- I . .,,* '' " C Rt A P. 'II.- - Of tde O-.reiiing of the Mchfirua's. a. THEY are said to overflow, when they continue lon-,ger than their:ufual time; their usual time of con- tinuance is two. or three. Days; in tome Women that give themselves to no Exeicife, four or fivq Days. - a, Wien they come oftner than the Legitimate time. Their Legitimate time is, the time that the Moon Travels through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, that is Twenty Se- ven Days, some odd Hours, and odd Minutes.,It is caused. i. By Rapture of some Vessel. CaGt. 2a. By immoderate Purgation.,3.. By some concording Humour. 4. By hard Labour in Child-bed, or unkind hand-,ling in it. Sig/. If the Vefels be broken, the blood gufheth,abundantly in heaps.. If some gnawing Humour, they are not much in quanti- ty, but come with much Pain.,The other are easily to :e jkown. Czarsi. Such. Women as arc fuije4 to this Disease,,'uffe/r Abortion upon every light occasion. Let them ablain from Exercise . and movig as much as iriay be, and siem all.coldDrinks. - .',Because
Because this Disease weakens the Womb muclb, freng- en it as you are taught in the Chapter before. And here I consef I differ from all Physicians that Cyer ote, for they all unanimoully hold that the DiseaSe is fir be cured before the Part grieved-be Rrengthened; where- I counsel to firengthen the Part firfi that so Nature may able to help on th's Cure; the Work will be better and ner done with Nature's help than without. Having firt engthened the Womb, proceed to the Cure thus;,aLre. I. Anoint the Reins of the Back with Oyl of Ro- fes, Oyl of Myrtle, or Oyl of Quinces,' which you afe. I suppose the last mientioned to betlie bedl; do thus c-y Night, and when you have Io done, wrap a piece of hite Bays about our Reins, the Cotto'fide next your iii n, d keep the fame Bay's always to it. . . z. To injeA the Juice of Plaitane into the Womb, is an mirable Remedy. 3. Sage, the roots of Dillort and Tormentil, Cinque- le, Knotgrass, Comfry, Sannicle, Ladies'M'antle,' cot- n Rod, Loollrife, Meadiweat, Archarigel (that blafphe- us Name our rhyficians give dend Nettles) Mbouc-ear, lomon's Seal, Purslane, Soriel, Red-Beets, S$heperd's- e,'Red-Rofes, Acorn-cups, the bark' of'Oak-Trees, -Coral, Maftich, are Medicinal, boiled in your ordina- Drink. I could with from my Heart you knew all there Herbs; u cannot cxpect I should travel all over the Nation to teach u; you fee what ignorancethie Learned Colege of Phy- ians hath trained you up in; iniru& you. one another as ell as you can, know that you were not born for yourfilves one, and I will do what I can to inftim& you in-he kiow- dge of the Herbs before I am half a Year Older. 4. Above all, I commend this Medicine to you: Take comf;y Leaves, or Root., and loeunm osdJuol-vort, of each anldft, bilo thenm 'tell (htitg &it broiftd) in' Ale, and il a good draught of it s ward. then; this (with the BIle- of Cod) 'will hblp jo:, t!o'a the Ai&.«s, oy the &'eils. (t I. Take Ciinnamon, Caffa lignet, Opitu, of each iawo d'ian.i.;,Wrrh, If'jite Ppern; Gallanrzzr of tacbhone dram: Dijkohe,tst
R. Sometimes (though but seldom) they are flopyc through fainfs. This is known by vehement Pains aboi their Reins, their Veins are £wollen, and they are such Pec pie as live idly, and:abound in blood.,Such mult be cured by bleeding in the Arm, for fulne caueth distention or ftretchin g, and'diftention hinders eC tiamiflion: And bleeding in te' Foot makes the difentio greater, 'as was well noted by Dr. Ri-vriss, Physician to th Frecb King.,But let this be done with good Advice, and great War. ness.,- C H A P. II. Of tie O-wrlutiarg of the lMc,,l/rua's. I. THEY are said to overflow, when they continue Ion,ger than their: usual time; their usual time of con tinuance is two or three Days; in lome Women that giv themselves to no Exercise, four or five Days,,2, When they come oftner than the Legitimate time Their Legitimate time is, the time that the Moon Travel through the twelve Sins of the Zodiac, that is Twenty Se ven Days, some odd Hours, and odd Minutes.,It is caused. I. By Rupture of feme Vefiel. CarIc. z. By immoderate Purgation.,3.. By some concording Humour. 4. By hard Labour in Child-bed, or unkind hand,ling in it. Sg/?. If the Vessels be broken, the blood gushet,abundantly in heaps. If some gnawing Humour, they are not much in quant ty, but come with much Pain.,The other are easily to be known. Caution. Such. Women as are subjet to this Difeal,fulfer Abortion upon every flight occasion. Let them abilain from Exercise and moving as much inay be, and from allcold Drinks. -,Becar
Because this Disease weakens the Womb much, lrcng- then it as you are taught in the Chapter before.,And here I confefi I differ from all Physicians that ever wrote, for they all unanimously hold that the Difea.e is Jirt to be cured before the Part grieved-be lfrengthened; where- as I counfcl to firengthen the Part firtt, that so Nature may be able to help on this Cure; the Work will be better and sooner done with Nature's help than without. Having first strengthened the Womb, proceed to the Cure thus;,Cure. I. Anoint the Reins of the Back with Oyl of Ro-,fcs, Oyl of Myrtle, or Oyl of Quinces, which you please. I suppose the lalf mentioncd to be'the bed; do thus cvc-y Night, and when you have so done, wrap a piece of white Bays about your Reins,. the Cotton'fide next your kin, and keep the fame Bays always to it.,z. To injec the Juice of Plaritane into the Womb, is an admirable Remedy.,3. Sage, the roots of Diflort and Tormentil, Cinque- foyle, Knotgrass, Comfry, Sannicle, Ladies Matle,' Gl'- den Rod, Loolfrife, Mcadfweat, Archangel Ithat blafphe- mous Name our I'hyficians give dead Nettles) Mouke-car, Solomon's Seal, Purslane, Sorrel, Red-Beets, Shep-erd's- purse, 'Red-Rofes, Acorn-cups, the bark' of Oak-Trees, Red-Coral, Maftich, are Medicinal, boiled in your ordina- ry Drink.,I could with from my Heart you knew all these Herbs; you cannot cxpte I should travel all over the Nation to teach you; you fee what ignorance the Learned College of Phy- ficians hath trained you up in; inRruc& you one another as well as you can, know that you were not born for yourselves alone, and I will do what I can to inltrui you in-the know- ledge of the Herbs before I am half a Year Older.,4. Above all, I commend this Medicine to you: Tak of comrfiy Leavces, or Roitf, and c/lcnt I Paurd-,u.ort, of each an ,hanldfl, boil tlhm .tll (hbeti fjfl bt tJd) in, Ale, and drink a good drauglt of it awnv aind then ; thil (with. the Blef- /,igof God) xill help Jo:t, t.'Ol the MoIt., . the 'ejibel open.,5. Tale Cinnapnon, CaS/a Lignna, Opium, of each itvo adra.l.; Miy-h, If''itc Pepno, G(an/.in, of eacb hMne dram: Diolve,the
tka m l OG iin i Wbitvir, t ea ttt rs to Ps'rwir; te M te, I'mrisu Pils 7 MnixiZg es theu tetg r eafaO, a,.t lktfi Party Bisfcad tab htr Pills ty Night going te Bed; Idtl M ills .d a~ * r Westi t eos ftma Grairu.,CHAP. Il. Of the Flax of the Wm&. D~ F- LUX of the Womb is a continual Distillation from time. that pit of the body for a long time together, Natre car/ying out the Excrement that way which fihould be voided ~me other way.,The Form and Colour of what is voided, fiews what humour offads, (if I had written to Scholars, I would have said the peccant humour) for,,In tome it is Red, like putrified Blood, and that Cqa. proceeds from blood putrified.,In some it is white and pale, and that proceeds fro Fgm.,In some Yellbowli, and that signifies Choler. Ifpre blood come on, if a Vein were opened, either some Corofion or Gnawing of the Womb is to be feared, or else some Laceration or tearing in her last Delivery, and it is to be fared the Midwife acted not her part either like an ho- nest, or like a knowing Woman.,AM of them are known by there Signs: The Sigiw. place of Conception is continually moist with the,Humours, the Face is ill coloured, lhe diftafleth and aberreth her Meat, breathes difficulty, the Eyes are tfwolen, aimetimes with pain, sometimes without.,The Cure is different as the Cause, For,,If pureBlood come out, you must let blood in Cae. the Arminthe firfPlace, and the Cephalickor Head,Vein is the fttet; for unles yoi draw back the .Blod, yen can never flop it, as yo'mnfot Pump outthe Wa- terof a Ship before you can flopthe Leak.,Then the latter Medicines in the last Chapter, made of Conm--roots and Wound-wort.,The
The Juice of Plantain injcted into the Womb is good; and if you add the Juice of Confry to it, it were better. I have taught you how to keep thele Juices all the Year in my Engl/h Physician Enlarged, the lat Edition.,If Flegm be the cause, let Cinnamon be a Spice used in all her Meats and Drinks, and let her use her body to hot Antidotes, as Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, 'c. to take a little every Morning.,Let her take of Cofmrary, Agrimony, the bark of cornm- mon Elder, Dwarf Elder, Caraway-Seed bruised, Liquorilh, of each a handful; which boiled in a pottle of White-wine (or for want of it Rhenish Wine) to a Quart, drink half a Pin: of it every Morning, adding half a dozen drops of Spi- rit of Caftoreum to it, and an Ounce of Syrup of Roses with Agarick.,Let her beil Burnet, Mugwort, Fetherfew and Vervainin all her broths.,Let her, if lhe please, purge her body with Pills of Am. ber (you may find them, and the way how to make them, in my lafi Edition of the Loadon Dienatory) She may take a Scruple at Night going to bed, they will not work till next Day, and use this divers Nights.,Half a dram of Myrrh taken every Morning, is an excel- lent Remedy for this Infirmity.,If it come of Choler, let them take Borrage, Bugloss, Red Roses, Endive and Succory Roots, Lettiec, White Poppy-Seeds, of each a Handful. Boil them in White Wine, from a Pottle to a Quart; let her drink halfa Pint every Morning, to which half Pint add Syrup of Peach Flowers, and Syrup of Cichory with Rubarb, of each an Ounce. It will gently purge her, you may find the way how to make them in my last Edition of the LaJdon Difpn- iatory. After the use of this ofme Mornings, let her take the Powder of Ivory and Mifleto of the Oak, of each one Scruple, mix'd with half an Ounce of Conserve of Roses, every Morning for a Week together (I never knew any Author could give a reason why Mineto, of the Oak, Ihould be better than any other Mileto, neither do' believe it is.,D Laily,
Lafly, If it comes of putrifed Blood, having first let blood in the Foot, fRrengthen the Womb as you were taught before.,I know all Writers hold Melancholy to be one cause of this evil, but I am of a contrary Opiniofi, unless (as many do; they take the adust Choler and adust Blood to be Melan- choly, for Melancholy is altogether retentive, and how car that cause Expullion ?,I hall conclude this Chapter with three general Rules, make much of them.,z. Let the Patient forbear violent Motions, Paflions and rtnrbations of Mind. z. Let them forbear all tharp and salt Meats, and such things as provoke Urine.,3. Of dead Nettles (which our Blasphemous Physicians call Areb-.ngels, whereas the word Michael, who is the Arch- -.rl, dignifies as God. there are three forts, White, Red ans Yellow, 'iz. their Flowers are of that Colour; the White-Flowers help the White. the Red help the Red,' and Ahe Yellow the Yellow Flux in Women. You may use them which way you please.,To cure all Diseases read my Platerw, Semiertrs, Rivefriw, Rio/alr, Barthelinau, Johnfiot, Yefin&gi, &c.,CHAP. IV. Of the Flling out of the lT'mb. ,Dtfdei-THE Womb is (aid to be fallen out when it is so . turn'd down that it sticks out, for it is never clo-,fed from its Ligament. Cawfe. It may be caused by Lome Fall, by a Blow, by,Overlifting, by vehement Trouble of Mind, by fore Labour in Child-birth, by unlkilful drawing out the Child, especially if it be Dead, or of the After-birth, by Mother Caeirclf when she turns Midwife.,The Disease is obvious to the Eye, and that is Sigu. Sign enough. ?azsi. The vulgar way of Cure is to put itin again with,a hot Cloth, and there it will flay as long as a Cat tied to a Pudding; and if it be fwell'd that it will not up,,bathe
bathe it with a Decostion of Mallows, Linseed and Fenu- greek-feed boiled in Water, and if this do it not the firRl time, ufeit the second; and when you have got it up, let the Woman lie with her Legs close together; for fear Ihe mhould not, tie them together with a swathing Band; they should flop it with a Cork, and tie a Bladder over it also.,Let her use Odoriferous things to her Nose; such be Civit, Galbanum, Sytrax Calalitis, Wood of Aloes, e'c. let her apply fRinking things to her Womb, such be Affa- foetida Oil of Amber, the fmoak of her own Hair being burnt.,This is moll certain, that the Womb flies from all stink- ing things, and applies to all sweet Things, therefore these are good; as also to apply a Plaister called H)jftricum (you may find in my lal Edition of the Difpnfatory) to the Belly, in the middle of which Plaifler, place some Cotton, and upon the Cotton four or five Grains of Civet, and let the Civet lie just upon her Navel.,But my own Magnetic Cure is this: Take a common Br-leaf (yoa may keep tem dry if you please all the Year) and apply to her Head, and that will dram the WVomb ,2t'a.rd.: In the Fits of the Mother, put it unkr tle Sole of her Frt, and it 'will draw it dmna.,ards. Bur-seed Aeaten into 1' ., -t wjli do te like, they command the Womb 'which Vway you ;ie ar, and hy orderly u/age ivill cure any Dieafe of it.,'Tis a Plant of Venus, and is belt gathered when She is Angular andftrong in her hour, and the Moon applying to her.,if it will not readily go up, by reason of Carelefnefs in not using the Remedy time enough, you may bathe it as you are told.,CHAP. V. Of the Injfanmatin of the WioA. T HE Womb is inflamed by many Caurts. CaGfes.,x. By a Bliou. 2. Bylopping of the Terms. 3. By Abortion. 4. By Ukeration. 5. By Immoderate Letchery. 6. By overmuch luaing. 7. By CoMs.,D 2 Si88
.sgw. Its Companions are an acute Fever, pain in the,Heads, especially about the hinder part or Root of the Eyes, Cramps in the Arms, Fingers and Neck; the Womb is vex'd with panting Pains: It all the Womb be inflam'd, it will be Pain'd all over; if but part, the Pain will be where the part inflamed is; For, if the hinder Part be inflamed the Back is frained most, and then they cannot go well to Stool, because the right Gut is prefled together; or if not so, 'tis dificmpcr'd.,If the forepart be Inflamed there is pain about the Blad. der, and the paflage of Urine is hindred; they make Urine Vith difficulty, because the passage is on the Fore.part of the Womb. If any of both fides be Inflamed, the Leg next the In- flamed fide, moves but slowly and heavily.,If it be in the Neck of the Womb, the passage is close and burning hot.,For Cure, First strengthen the Womb, as you OCre. were taught before; for this may cure it by Sym-,pathy. If youcan do a thing by fair means, never .ttempt it by foul:,Endive and Succory-roots are commended by Authors in this Disease, being boiled in clarified Whey. But my own Directions are there few.,I. Clarifie your Whey, then boil Plantain Leaves or Roots in it, and drink it for your ordinary Drink. Then,,. Inject the Juice of Plantain into the Womb with a Syringe: If it be in Winter, when you cannot get Juice, make a firong DecoAion of the Leaves and Roots in Water, and injeA that up with a Syringe, let it be but Blood- warm. This Medicine is worth a Thousand.,3. If the Body be Costive, use a Clyler. + Let them avoid movings of Body and Troubles of Mind.,I seldom prescribe Diets to Women, because they have gotten such a trick they will keep none; yet becaufeit isvery probable there are some wife Women (it were a hard cafe clf) I flall intreat them to use a very slender Diet, and let it be offuch Food as is cold and Moill. Barley Broth is an admirable Remedy for them; it were very well if they could,satisfy
satisfy themselves with it, and Panda. As for Drink, let them forbear all Wine and firong Beer, much more Strong- Water.,5. In all Inflammations especially if the Inflammation be great, Blood-letting is an excellent and admirable Cure, as alTo very speedy. In this cafe the bell way, is to bleed them in the Ancles, becaufc of the immediate passage between the Vein Steb.fna and the Womb.,6. Outwardly apply to the Region of the Womb, Wool moiflened in Vinegar of Roses.,7. If the Inflammation be near the neck of the Womb make a Pessary of Wool, dip it in Juice of Plantain, or Juice of Purslane, or Juice of Sengreen, and put it up the Privities.,CHAP. VI. Of imSnis of t:h Womb. TH E Wtomb is sometimes affli&ed by Wind, or putfe,up; and this sometimes appeareth to the Eye of Sense, and sometimes it cannot be discerned but by the Eye of Reason.,Authors differ much in the Cause. and as much'in the Cure;. however, they fay, the Signs are Swelling in the bottom of the Belly, pricking Pair in the Stomach, Back and Head, Dif;ention of the Sides: And sometimes they fay, Women feel wind coming out of their Privities, (if you will beleive them).,To tell you the truth, my Opinion is, that the Difeafc you cal the Fits of the Motler, is nothing but a windiness of the Womb, which because it hinders not Conception that I know of, I have nothing to fay to it at this time; however, if any Woman will not believe me, I cannot help it; 'tis but forbearing windy Meats, and taking such things as ex- rel Wind, and strengthen their Womb, as they were taught *be.re, -and then it (together with Nature) helps itself.,As for moistness of the Womb, which many speak and write of, how-the Womb when it is over-moit will nbt re- tain the Seed, the thing is very propable, but the very fame with a Flux of Flegm, and to be cured the fiame way.,D 3 CHAP.
CHAP. VII. Of the ectr ad Drinfi oef the if'Nmb. T H E Signs were ihcwn you before The Disease moRof,incident to Women of a Cholerick Complexion. As for Remedy, such Herbs as cool and moiflen are very Medicinal, of which tinking Arrack (used as you have been taught before) seems to bear the Preheminence.,Neither are Plantain and Mallows much inferiour to it, used as before, efFecially Plantain.,Goats Milk often drunk with Honey or Sugar, is a very excellent Drink for Women troubled with this Difeale; and if so, other Milk cannot be bad.,And many other Herbs are Medicinal for this Infirmity; 'all which or so many of them as you can get, you may boil with a Sheeps Head till you have boiled all to pieces, and ule the Deco&ion either as Drink or in Pottage.,The Herbs are thee, Vine-leaves, Willow-leaves, Endive, Soccoy both Rotts and Leaves, Violet-leaves Strawberry- leaves, Railins of the Sun, Borrage, Bugloss, either Leaves or lowes.,If you please, in such Decocion you may take ten or weny Grains of Red Coral, mixed with as much Cinna- on. St my Exngl4i P/,f-oia f or ts ore at large. If your Body need Purging, take such Medicines as Purge Choler, and without cool thetReins, or else you were as good do nothing. Of which Cafia Fillula newly drawn, seems to me to be the best: You may take an Ounce of it when you go to Bed. Never fear the following of your Bulinefs dhe next day.,Lafily, Appiy to your Navel a Cere-cloh, which you may find in my last Edition of the Lmdm Di/fnjpr y called by Name Cera SmaItaium. Other Remedies you may find in this Book more at large, to which I refer you.,I confas I could have preTcribed many other Medicir.s, as other Authors have done before me, as Peffaries, Baths, Fomentations, &c. but these, if rightly uscd, are enough, for write to help you, no: to trouble you.,E C T.
SECT. Ill. Of Barrenn.eis agairfl Aature. T is not one Physician's Opinion alone, that many ,Vo-,men are made Barren by Diabolical Meanes. I do not call them Diabolical, because they cannot be a-ed withlout invocation of evil Spirits, but because they are done by abule of Nature; for as the right use of Natu- ral Things is from God, so the a;buse of them is from the Devil. And so many unworthy Creatures are wont to serve Men and Women at the very time of their Marriage, that the Man can never (before it is remedied) have to do carnally with his Wife, which is all Publick Marriages are good for: Some, altho' the Scripture (that I know of) give no publick Rule for Marriages yet we all know Marriage is a civil thing; therefore ought more properly to belong to the civil Magil- trate, than to the Clergy-Man; but the Clergy get Money by it, that's the Key of the Buflnefs.,,However, to prevent such Mischief, Authors have left ways: As,,x. To carry St. JoHn's-lmrt about them which for that cause is called Fugs D~enmwm, a driver away of Devils .,2. To carry a LoadPfone about them. 3. A Plailler of St. John's-Wort laid to theReini. 4. A whole Swill hung overthe Bed. 5. The heart of a Turtle Dove carried about them. Cam P224?til a4us.,But suppose the Mischief be already done, and the' Man cannot give his Wife due Benevolence, how may it be help'd? In this I will tell you no more than I have known tred. The Cure is eafie, and was done by the Man 'only making Water thro' his Wife's Wedding Ring, so thce was one Superstition helped another. ',Such as would be fcilful Physicians, let them read there Books of mine, viz. Platern, Sennertu, Ririuw, RioLaus, Bartholiiws, oebnhfn, Stiingius, Ruaad, Fetrli Sanfor, ColD, &c.B,D~ 4BOOK.
B 0 K IV. Of what hinders Conception. Shall deliver my mind in this,,I. By 'WaY of orkcritg thf Bads z. By waj es Afeltdi , And let each of there fland in a SeAion by itlelf.,SECT. I. i a at 'mra tiat .rcuWl haa.. Cbi&'ue situld ~rder her Bon)'. I- F Women would be fruitful, let them give themselves to exercile. Idleness is hateful to God, and dedruc- tiveto the Creation; and that's the reason such Women live idly (as moR of our City Dames do } have so few Chil- dren, and those they ha'e seldom live, but are troubl'd with nmfperable Difeae till they die: Or if they live, they are so fpoil'd by apilh Education, that they seldom come to good: Wheeas poor Men and Women that labour hard, have ma- ny Children ifually, and they are strong and luofty.,I Dhali (to please you good Women) give you a short Para- phrase pon both Exerrije and Re, yea, such a one, that if }ou mean to be wife, you may know what is mol fitting for your own Bodies': But if you never intend to be wiser, you hall not blame me when you whine for lack of Children, or for the Death of those you had.,Ewnci is either AModerat or lornmodtrate. tskatrta -i neither to mubch, nor too Little. m JmUrbat i; either Ieherwat or Exc.si/e.,Atudrate Extrcij. I. Stirs up Natural Heat. z. Quickens the Spirits. 3. Opens the Pores. 4. Wass the Excrements of the third Digellion. 5. Makes the Body, Senses and Spirits Airong, and that's ti way to have strong ChildLn.,6. Comforts
6. Comforts all the Limbs. 7. Helps Nature in all her Etercife, which Procreation of Children is none of the leaf. Immodrate Exetcife (which is a thing our City-Dames are utterly unacquainted with, unless it is Exercise their Tongues.),s. Wafts, Dries, Consumes, Wearies both Body and Spirits.,2. Hurts the Body in every part. 3. Overthrows Nature's AAions.,Rerf is Moderate or Irnmodrnte. Moderate Reft. 1. Comforteth and refrelheth Nature. 2. Recruits a Tired Brain. 3. Maintains Health 4. Strengthens both Body, Senses and Members.,ImmAoderate Ref or extream Idlenrei. I. Dulls both Minds Senses and principal Inlfruments of the Body.,2. Caufeth Crudities, evil Humours, evil Excrements, Cold, Sickness, infinite Infirmities, above half the Infirmities that accompany the Body of Man and Woman, and there- fore it was nobly done of Lycarg.a the.Spartan, to compel every one to work four Hours in a Day.,It hallens old Age. It caufeth Deformity. Hark, you Women, if you would be Young and Fair use yourfilves to Labour. And now, if you can find any of there accidents in. your selves, you know both the Cau/e and the Cure.,Secondly, Difrontent wonderfully hinders Conception, and Csntent furthers it as much.,i. I Ihall speak of Content, in which confider. s. Conatem of Mitd Dilates the Heart and Arteries where- by the vital Blood or Spirit is sufficiently difiributed through, out the Body, and thence arise such affections as Pleaie, Re- create and Refrefli the Nature of Man, as Hope, Joy, Love, Gladness, Mirth, &c. :.,a. They Comfort and Strengthen not only ihe parts of the Body, but also the Operations and Imaginations of the Mlind: For it i agreed upon by all Authors, yea, the truth it-.sef,D S hath
bah fct its Seal to it, that the Imagination of the Mother operates most forcibly in the Conception of the Child. How much the better then were it for Women to lead contented Lives, that so their Imaginations may bepure and clear, that so their Conception may be well Formed, than to Vex Fret and Fume, Fling and Throw, Murmer and Repine, and fill their Minds full of diirasling Cares and Fears, as an Egg is of Meat, making a Tumult in the Spirits, and bring all their Thoughts into sech a Confusion, that they look more like Beats than Women, so that if they could but fee them- selves, they could not but be afham'd, to fee how like An- ticks they are. The bell Medicine I can prescribe them in this Dielafe, is this, that they would give their Mind often to read that excellent Book of Mr. 7erremiab Burroughs En. timled Chrif.ian rntentmrtt, where I am confident they shall End all their ObjeCtions answered; and a Women feldoin wants Objections, if the do but look upon her Apron-firings.,As fir Dicntrt, I mhall give you my Judgment.,I. Js a PlF/ian. :. s a Divine. I. is a Ptffician. s. It stirs up iuch affedions in the Body as are Inimical both to Body and Mind, and therefore must need either kill or spoil the Child in the Womb: Such are Anger, Paflion, Ha- trd, Fear for things to come, Fear for things pafl, Sorrow, Sighing and Grief of Mind. All there Corrupt the very iNoarilhment wherewith the Child is nourished in the Womb, and oftentimes kills the Fruit in the very Bud.,2. It diverts the vital Heat from the circumference to the Center, thereby consuming the vital Spirits, by which means they come very slowly, or not at all to the Child.,3. ItDeflroys, Overthrows, Murthers both Body Mind. 4. It hafcens old Age and Death, by consuming the Ra- dical Moislure.,a. ds Di-viu . Tbefeechyou tolet my councel be acceptable to you, onfider what you do. i. When you have been discontented twenty four Hours, yo are never the wir, never the nearer to the obtaining .fwit ~ ;dgfrc;i We talaing are. m aldd aHair'i readth,tc f~s
to bis /lat rt And what a foolii thing it is to do your selves so great a mischief without the least hope of doing your' selves the leai good ?,z. Discontent keeps you from the good you desire. You will not give your Children a thing while they cry, neither will God you, while you are Discontented.,3- It makes your Evil worse: Bccaufe others wrong you, you will wrong your selves;. because you want temporal things, you will want Health also.,+ All things come by the Providence of God; and'what-. soever Mans end be, his ends are always good, Are art two Sparrccs i.fd for a Farthing, and yet not ont of the fals to the ground ocithout your Father? If God takes care for the Spar- rows, one of which is worth but half a Farthing, will he not take care for you?,;. It flicws your Spirits linked to the World, and not ri- fen with Jesus Chrifi; for if Discontent for things' of this World take up your Thoughts, tell me what of you is risen with Christ? He that is risen with Chril, minds the thingt that are ahnove.,6. It ihews you are little provided for Death; if you know you muff leave the World, why are you Difeontented that it leaves you ? -,7. You deny Eternity; for if you knew the World Ihould be consumed, you would use it to tread upon, not to fill your Pockets with.,8. Your Interest in Chridt is but little; for M'w cr tie. Car- caf/ is, thithlr 'iill the Eagle gather together.,9. How justly may God withdraw his Protection from such as cannot reft upon it without Discontented Heart,.,o. You put away your own comfort. All true comfort comes from the Holy Ghost theCcmforter; and the HolyGhoft seldom or never refts upon a fad Soul. And therefore the Prophet El/ha called for Mtfic to chear his Spirits before he was fit to receive the Spirit of God. Confider these things and you Ihall fee what a folly and madness Dif-ontent is. That you have two Ways, or Means of Pruitfulnefs.,t. Exercik of Bod.. 2. Content of Mind.,D 6 IIhav
i have but one more, and that is, re pr,.firvt t, Womb in .* diC dr . I note is here only, because People are very ignorant in Physic; The foraher Rules will help you if you would have Children, fee that the Menftrua's come down in good order, the Colour of them will shew you what Humour offends; purge it out; the former Rules will diret you. I man thOse in thelaft Book, in the Chapter, Of Flux of the Wodn. If they come down Difoloured it thews ill Diet. fs pure Blood comes down, be fare that Woman is very prone to conceive with Child.,Te Cure al Difcafes, read myPiterw, Stimersui, Riverius, Aiaeat, Barthslimu, JaenJfio, f/iigsw, &c.,SEC T. II. Al,.-cirie for a lU[man that 'would hae Cbi/mren. T H IS I hall deliver to you.,z. By :'ay of Cadtjiox, :. Br cia of Precept. fy ''7 cos Caution. . Use not the at of Copulation too often: Some fay it makesthe Womb flippcry: I rather think it makes the Womb more willing to open than Ihut. Satiety gluts the Womb; and makes it unfit to do its Office, and that's the reason Whores have seldom Children: And also the reason why Women afterlong absence of their Hulbands, when they come again, usually soon conceive.,a. Let the time be convenient; for fear of furprize hin- des Conception.,3. Let it be after perseEt digestion, let neither hunger nor dunkennefs be upon the Man or Woman.,4 Let the desire of Copulation come Naturally, and not by Provocation, thegreater the Woman's desire of Copulati- na is, the more fnbjea is she to Conceive. 5S Women ar more fubjeCf to Conceive a day or two after the Monthly Terms are flayed. 6. Avoid Eating, or Bearing about you all such things as cauae Barrenefs: Such be the Bones of a Stagg's Heart, Emeralds, Sapphires, Ivie-Berries, Jet, Burnet-Leaves and tootsIats, Tongue, Steel-Dul, Mints, &r.,7. Apilh
7. Apish ways and manners of Copulation hinder Con- ception.,By 'vay of Pre.ept. i. The Runnet of a Hare mixtwith a little Cotton and put up into the Womb as Paffary, and remaining there a Day, is an excellent Remedy: But let it be done prgfantly upon the flopping of the Menfirua's and tied up in a Linnen Cloth, and a firing tied to it, that so you draw it out again, else you will make mad work.,2. If the Woman's Body be too hot, letting Blood in the Vein Saphena, profittth much. i. Because it cools, a. Be; cause it cleanfcth the Womb.,3. A Loadstone carried about the Woman, caufeth not only Conception, but concord between Man and Wife.,4. The Heart of a Male Quail carried about the Man, and the Heart of a Female about the Woman, furthers Conception exceedingly, and caufeth mutual Love.,5. The Root of Eringo, Piony and Satyrion, being eaten, caufc Conception.,6. Exercise your Bodies before you take Counsel of the under Sheet; go to the School of Mars before you go to the School of Veins.,7. A Plaister of Labdanum spread upon Leather, and applied to the Region of the Womb, mightily dihpofeth it to Conception.,There Rules are excellent. I confers many other may be added in refpee of Food, Diet and the like; for which take this general Rule, All Creatures that are fruitfal, teirg eater, male thoje fritful that cat them, as Crabs, Lobiters, Prauns, rc.,Likvcifr the Ancients havt left many wiays. rYou tale them as Meats or Afldicines; fime of wvhich are these:,s. Caftoreum in Powder, take half a dram, or a scruple in Malmsey in the Morning.,2. The Womb of a Hare beaten to Powder, and taken in like Manner.,3. A scruple of Galangal taken every morning in Powder rids the Body of such infirmities as cause Barrenness. Take White-Wine. And truly I believe for very moist Women there is scarce a better Remedy.,The 4,
4. The Stonesof a Fox dried and beaten toPowder, and a dram taken in the Morning in Sheep's Milk.,5. The Stones of a Boar used in the like manner. 6. The Brain of Sparrows and Pigeons eaten, and (for ought I know) you may eat Flesh and all, for they are very fruitful Creatures.,7. The Pizle of a Bull dried and grated to Powder, and a dram taken at a time.,S. To hold sweet things to the Place of Conception, before the aft of Copulation, because they draw the Womb down; bat after the act, to the Nose, to draw the. Matrix up.,These, with many others, too tedious here to relate, have been quoted by Authors. Such as would cure allDifeafes, let them read these Books of mine, viz. Platerus, ,enertw,, Rivi, Rio/anu, Bar- tbamu, Jobatan, eJflingiu. RulaMdw, Sanror, Co/,, &c.,BOOK. V. A Guide for Women in Conception. S Ome Women are so ignorant, they do not know when - they are Conceived with Child, and others so coy they will not confers when they do know it, I Ihall labour to help the former. The latter if they will learn to be a little wiser, may help themselves. I i~ then divide this Book into these Chapters. 1. Signs of a Woman conreirvd with Ch:d. 2. Wfther a tlak or Female be conCUved. 3. Cetfptian of Tf-ins, aId t&eRn.,Authors Confuted. 4. Of i.n ftra Childrn.,Authors Opinion.,My own.,C H A P.
CHAP. I. Sig-K of CoNpi.ti. 'N Any are the ways Authors have left for Women to,know whether they be with Child or not, which hap- pens true in many Women, but not in all; some of which I ihall quote, viz.,1. A coldness and chilnefs of the outward parts after Co- pulation, for the heat retires to make the Conception. ',2. The Belly waxeth very flat, because the Womb clofeth it self together to nourish and cherish the feed.,3. Wringing or Griping Pains like Cramps happen in the Belly about the Navel.,4. Loss of Appetite to Victuals, and four belchings, ex- ceeding weakness of Stomach.,5. Divers Appetites and Longings are ingendered. 6. 'If cold Water be drunk, a coldness is left in the Breat. 7. The Tops of the Nipples look redder than formerly. 8. The Breafs begin to swell and wax hard, not without pain and forenets,,9. The Veins of the Breafs are more clearly seen, than they were wont to be,,to. The Veins of the Eyes are clearly seen, and the Eyes seem Something dicfoloured, as a Looking glass will Ihew you: This is a good sign.,I . The Body is weakned and the Face discoloured. 12. The Excrements of the Guts are voided painfully, because the Womb swelling, thrusts the right Guts together,,These be the Vulgar Rules, or at lead the bell of them. Give me leave to deliver what I have known to be true, and never yet failed me,,1. If under the Eye the Vein be swelled, I mean under the lower Eye-lid, the Veins in the Eyes appearing dearly, and the Eye fornething difcolour'd, if the Woman have not her Terms upon her at the time, nor watched the Night be- fore, you may certainly conclude her to be with Child: And this appears mot plainly jus upon her Conception, and the firt two Months. I have told many Women of it before they have been with Child a fortnight and never failed. -,i. Stop
4. The Stones of a Fox dried and beaten to Powder, and a dram taken in the Morning in Sheep's Milk.,S. The Stones of a Boar used in the like manner. 6. The Brain of Sparrows and Pigeons eaten, and (for ought I know) you may eat Fleih and all, for they are very fruitful Creatures.,7. The Pizle of a Bull dried and grated to Powder, and a dram taken at a time.,8. To hold sweet things to the Place of Conception, before the at of Copulation, because they draw the Womb down; but after the aft, to the Nose, to draw the. Matrix up.,These, with many others, too tedious here torelate, have been quoted by Authors.,Such as would cure allDifeafes, let them read these Books of mine, viz. Platers, Senitrtu, Ri'vri', Rio/anus, Bar- thbor, Jobaton, IVl'ingim. Rulamjw, Sandor, Col., &c.,BOOK. V. A Guide for Women in Conception. S Ome Women are so ignorant, they do not know when S they are Conceived with Child, and others so coy they will not confers when they do know it, I ihall labour to help the former. The latter if they will learn to be a little wiser, may help themselves. 1 hall then divide this Book into there Chapters, 1. Signs of a Woma conceived Jiith Crild. a. Wihethr a aklt or Fane e bconrceved. 3. Cception of Twins, and the Rtfor.,Authors Confuted. 4. Of 'iarrfS Chiyrldn.,Authors Opinion.,My own.,C H A P.
CHAP. I. Sighs of CcnCeptie. N Any are the ways Authors have left for Women to ' know whether they be with Child or not, which hap- pens true in many Women, but not in all; some of which I shall quote, viz.,I. A coldness and chilnefs of the outward parts after Co- pulation, for the heat retires to make the Conception. ',2. The Belly waxeth very flat, because the Womb cloreth it self together to nourish and cherish the feed.,3. Wringing or Griping Pains like Cramps happen in the Belly about the Navel.,4. Loss of Appetite to ViCtuals, and four belchings, ex- ceeding weakness of Stomach.,5. Divers Appetites and Longings are ingendered. 6. 'If cold Water be drunk, a coldness is leftin the Breat. 7. The Tops of the Nipples look redder than formerly. 8. The Breafs begin to swell and wax hard, not without pain and forenels,,9. The Veins of the BreaRs are more clearly seen, than they were wont to be,,to. The Veins of the Eyes are clearly seen, and the Eyes seem something discoloured, as a Looking glass will nhew you: This is a good sign.,I . The Bod) is weakned and the Face discoloured. 12. The Excrements of the Guts are voided painfully, because the Womb swelling, thruits the right Guts together, These be the Vulgar Rules, or at leat the bed of them. Give me leave to eliver what I have known to be true, and never yet failed me,,i. If undar the Eye the Vein be swelled, I mean under the lower Eye-lid, the Veins in the Eyes appearing clearly, and the Eye ifoething difcolour'd, if the Woman have not her Terms upon her at the time, nor watched the Night be- fore, you may certainly conclude her to be with Child: And this appears mos plainly just upon her Conception, and the fir two Months. I have told many Women of it before they have been with Child a fortnight and never failed.,i. Stop
2. Stop the Urine of the Women close in a gla(s tfrea days, and then train it thro' a fine linnen cloth; if you lhall find imall living Creatures in it, beis iof assuredly con- ceived with Child; for the Urine which was before part of her own Sabtane, will be generated as well as its Mitlreft.,3. Take a handsome green Nettle, and put it into the U- rincof the Womrn, cover it cloe, and let it remain in a Whole Night; if the Woman be with Child, it will be full *f red spots on the Morrow; if not, it will be blackish. 'And thusmuch for Prognolficks, whether a Woman be with Child or not.,C H A P. 111. tstnentr a W»Kae be coaceive of a lMae or of a Feale. H Erein also I hall,,I Deie r JIO the Opinij~ of AuthAr,. z. IWhat Iba vefound t be true b) Expefrlenrti. Firlt, Authors give there to be iigns of Conception of a Male.,z. The Woman when she rifeth up from a Chair, or the like. doth sooner flay her felfupon her right Hand than on the left.,2, The Belly lies rounder and higher than when i: is a Female.,3. The Child is firfc felt to stir on the right fide, because according to fippcrates, the Male Children lie on the right fidc of the Womb.,4. The Woman breeds Boys easier and with lets pain than Girls, and carries her burden not so heavily, but is more nimble in moving. - . The right breaf is more plump and harder than the left and the right Nipple redder.,6. The colour of the Woman is more clear, and not so fwauty as when she conceives a Girl.,The contrary of there are signs of Conception of a Female t were but loss of time and blotting of Paper to quote them. These are some of the vulgar Rules, ad the belt of them, I never knw thce i. .,'. If'thc
:. If the circle under the Woman's Eye, which is qs a wan blew Colour, be more apparent under the right Eye, and the veins more apparent in her right, and that most dif- colour'd, she is with Child of a Boy; .if the marks be -molt apparent in the left, judge her to be with Child of a Girl.,2. Let her milk a drop of her Milk into a Bafon of fair Water, if it finks to the Bottom as it drops in, round in a drop, it is a Girl the goes withal; for if it be a Boy, it will spread and swim at top; this I never new fail, tho' it be con- trary to all Authors that I ever read.,C H A P. III. Of the Cacetption of T'uint. A Uthors make some flutter about the conception of TliqiM,and what the reason fsould be; as also how many children a Woman might naturally have at one Birth.,The Ancients held a Woman might naturally have seven, three Boy,, and three Girl, and one Htemaphrodite; and theit Opinioni was grounded upon another as Childish (for one Error ulhers in another) bccaue they conceived a Woman- had seven cells in her Womb, but long fince.Anotomifts bi. ginning to grow pretty perfet in their manualOperatin, having fond out that the Womb hadhbut one Cell, thiste- diculous Opinion was quickly exploded. .- Others hold a Woman can naturally have but two Chil- dren, and their Reason is, because h hath but two Breasts: I know no Reason but why they may as well hold a Woman can go but two. Miles, because she hath but two Legs. We know wellenough, that whatsoever is againfrNature, is mi- raculous: And we know as well that'6is no. Mirac for a Woman to have three Children at one Birth. . ..,In EfPt many times Women have five or fix Children at one Birth; the reason is supposed to be the Fruitfilnef of the Place, and if so (as is propabk) then let WOmen that would be fruitful, live in fruitful Places.,ArifPott quotes a Woman that brought fourth twenty perfect Children at fou Births.,... Tnr~
T ra~u tells a Story of another n Egipt that had seven' Children at one Birth. All this is nothing to what .4cr etus Magns talks of for he tellsof one Woman who had twenty-two perfect Children in her Womb at one time, and miscarried of them all; and of another who had an hundred and fifty at once, all as big as a Man's little Finger.,Besides, they fay in a Monatery in Holl/nd, thereremains a Tomb of one Margaret, a Countess of Hol/lead, who had three hundred fifty four living Infants born at a Birth and all Chiiten'd. I urge no Man or Woman:s Faith to believe there things: But come,,FirfR, si the Caufr of Conception of T',tins, or more Children t.ax one at once.,Secondly, IbFeter T7.ins be Cosaceived at one and the r. The Caue why Twins are Conceived. Herein Athors arc Various:- JAva~ a amd ~ Hat A s, held the Canfe to divert Cells iatdc Womb: but that as I told you, hath long since been found out as sale, as what is falfel.,E~tdet attributes it to the plenty of Seed, which is able toprocreat more than one.,tLs, o tthe frength of the Seed by the fame reason. Pb yg, to the Pofitiooftre Star, at the time ofCopulation. z. About the second, which is the greater Quefton of the two, Author differ much.,Some of the Ancients, and afmot all modern Writers hold them to be conceived at one and the ame ad of Copulation; the Seed not being ejaculated ont all at once. is divided in the Womb, and so more than one Child conceived. This though itfems fomethingplaufible, yet itwill not hold Water.,Another Reason they give is, because the Womb having received the Seed, shuts so clfe that it cannot give intermii- sion to any more Seed; and this is as weak as the other. For anfwerto the firt.,The beginning of the Conception is not the carling of the Seed into the Womb; for then a Woman must needs-con - ceive every time The hath carnally to do with her Hulband; butthe Exquisite mixture of the Seed of both Sexes, is the,very
very beginning and cause of Conception, and that the Wbmb having but one Cell, can exquisitely mix Seed in two Places- in that Work losing it self so close, that no vacum is left, is incredible. To the second I answer. The Womb ihuts not so close, but whatSeed is fuperfu- ous, hath a Place to be let out.,2. It is the Delights of Yemu that opens the Womb at all inmes, for it opens the Mufeles, therefore voluntarily; and why can it notopenthe Womb atonetime as wellas atanother?,3. Neither do all Authors agree, that Twins are conceiv- ed at one and the fame time, for Erafifratmu a famous Phyfi- cian, and all the Stoic Pbilofvphers, were of my Opinion, viz. that they are conceived at divers times. 4. All things are brought to pass by a due Limitation of time; and two Children conceived at once, must needs be born at once, which is impossible; he that would know more of this, let them but Peruse the Trorutaof H~rvs, one of the wiset of Men and let him but undertand what he reads, and it is poflible he may tell you (having the Nativities of both Twins) the very Hour and Minute when they were- Conceived. Let no A/feoger object to me, that the Trutima of Hermes is not exat to a Minute; butlet them know, that if there be a Truth in it t' a Sign afcening, there muf needs be a Truth to a Degree, and Minute, and Second; for Truth comes to a Punt, and the Failing man be in their non-under. handing of him.,5. All Authors hold a kind of range thing they call Superfrtatio#, in Women: Stfrfrtatien, as the Word liRi- fies, is a Woman's Conceiving of a second Child, after-ile has conceived of the frft.,Authors are very frequent in Proof of this, and omen flch have been known in Ldiir.,I small let pats what Poets fay of Alac~a's bringing forth Hercdues and Ilphyclus, one at the end ofthe seventh, the other at the end of the tenth Month (they that wou'd read it, may find it in Plautus his first Play, ltmphytrio,) and come to the relation of more fober Authors, and such as are fde digi~err.,H/ppocrate writes of a Woman of Lar/ia, who brought forth tvo living and pcrfet Children, forty Days difant the one from the other.,AJitbf
- Srijftt, de Hifria Aimn aliu., abounds in Examples; and some of the- Births were two Months difant.,Rhafi and A-.icea hold, That all Women that have their Terms, during the Time of their Going with Child, are subjet to conceive again.,PUiy gives divers Examples of it, Dwdodmrs in his Obferva- tions, rany more. And the like you may read in Lairrentiun.,Thus then you fee by this Argument, That 'tis poflibl ior a Woman to perfect a second Conception afteirfhe is conc-i. ved at the firt; and if so long after, as Authors fay, then much more likely sooner, before the Womb is filled with the growth of the first. But to make the matter beyond all dif- patc, whereas oar Translation faith, Gen . 42. Andbre cc ,ci- ljdnAMIaN Sar reis Brother Abel: Those that have Skill in the Origial bow, that it ihould be translated, She Con- 'ired upon Conception, anl are /is Brother Abel. Let this put maned to the Dispute.,And then, if the Trti/a of Heram, be true, ( I have heard any cavil at it, but never any disprove it, nor bring a bit of wie Reason againt it) there you may fnd a reason why two Children ma be conceived at a month's distance, and yet barn in one ay.; and if two Children, lying in the fame Wemb at the fime time, be at any time conceived at twice, is it propable ey ae f alwayts However, this is ap, paent, that byTeimaeny ofall Authors, yea by the Judg- ment of that prudent Physician Dr. REdS O, a Woman may nmiarry of one Twin, and yet go out her whole time with the oher, as Pisecr~te quotes in his Boolk Dr .Aatura Pur. Nay, both jR/otl and he, quote Women who brought forth two Children at one Birth, and a third fifeen weeks aser : Then it follows, that therare little better than Mur- derers, who force away the second Child the firR being born befre 'tis tinme; especially, if the flux of Blood be not great nor signs of Labour appear. ISms d9gYt rt: d ss Copulatioe aftr thoby b-a Cocrida,,h bol Beas do not. PpPeP the Daughter of grnppa the Roman, a wanton Lass, being aed the'Q flon,: Why BeaRs did not desire. it as well as Women ? Anfwiered, becaiaf they a e Bcais.,The . ...
The Answer was- acute 'tis eonfeft, and acuter, because not premeditated, and our own Writers give no wife ; for they jay 'tis a Prerograive and Virtue God hath only given to Woman. Alafs,-poor Fools. that make a Vertue, of a Vice. The very truth is, the Curse of God for Adam's fir Sin lies more heavily upon Man than it doth upon Beasts, and Lull is a greater part of this Curie; and the Propagation of many Childen at once, an Effet of thatIntemperancy And that I suppose to be Hippocrates his Rcafon of forbidding Copulation to Women with Child. For my own part, far be it from me to forbid it; for I know well enough the Nature of Men are so vicious, that he mull have to do with his Wife, or tome other Body else- in that time, or do that which is worse than either. However, hereby you fee the Fruits' of Original Sin, and what Cause you have to be humbled in' the F refence of God for it, and require his Aliftance againfi the wretched Effets it produceth.,C H A P. IV. Of tix 1tperfe Cbildr. M A NY are the Forms which Authors have leftto'Pokie.,rity, of Monfiruous Births; some altered in refpe. of Sex, as Hermaphrodites, ir Form as Beaftial, tome double. bo- died, some maimed, and many others which would do me ne good to write of, and you as little to read it.,Authors differ much in this Cause. The Divine refers it to the 'Jadgment of God alone, which if true without the help of Nature, then is every Monfler a Miracle.,AVfrologer, they refer it to the Stars, and the Position of the Moon in deficient degrees, at the time of Conception.,I cannot close with any of both these, neither altogether with a third, which, are more propable, although perhaps the Judgment of Ajlroegrs may concur.,Some hold the Imagination of the Women to be a great Cause, by beholding either such Monflter or fuch:Piaures l and that's the Reason, they fay, that they are so frequent in gi.pt. So also you may read of one that brought forth a,Black-
Black-more, the Woman beholding the Pitaure of a BlacK- more hangn in her Chamber. And of a Woman at Pia, that brought forth a Child fuil of Hairlike a Camel, because Ihe was so fuperlitioully wife to kneel every Day to the Pic- ture of oa t4e BAJ O doathedin Camels Hair. Also l my self know a Woman, this Day living, that in the time of her Conception, ixing her Eyes and Mind much upon a Boy with two Thumbs on each Hand, fitting at Dinner by her, brought forth a Boy with as many. This I fay may be the Cause of tome Deformity. But the greatedl Cause of Womens bringing forth Children imperfe~ , or mutilated, or crook-back'd, or with Issues or Leprosy, S&¢. I take to be, because A& of Copulation was done at that time when the Woman had he MAlenrua's upon her. It was not for nothing God himself sorbad a Man not to touch a Woman at such a time; and from such corrupt begn- nings uiually little good proceeds. Although the Grace of God is free, and lays hold on whomsoever he pleafeth, yet usually 41 do not fay always) such as are perverse in mind and man- ners as in Body, Cavendm ab tis quos Deu nota vit ( faith the Latin Proverb) beware of such whom God hath mark'd.,As for such as are born Monsters you mufl pardon me if I make a quetion whether they were conceived by some Beaf or not; for a Woman may conceive by the Seed of a Beast because it is by Nature fruitful, but there will be a Monler born, not a Man.,Let them that would be learned Philosophers, read there Booksof mine, viz. Plater, &Sartw, Ri.erius, Risoatur, Rotbo/iwu, 73,/0 , Pftingirw, Rd~dmu, Sanear, 'c.,BOO . VI. Of Mifiari ag i tiI'cme.. W Omen are motR subjel to fuler Abortion or Miscarriage,in the two irft Months of their Conception, because then the Ligaments are weak, and soon broken; and towards the tter end ofher time, becauf then the Womb is of full, hat it canot fhnt lfe, and withal the Child heavy. Moover Mny if not most Women, are fubjeot to be de- lvered arthe of fev Months, becaufs of the compleat-,ness
ness of the time. Seven being a Note of Perfection, and there- fore the Scripture faith of our Lord Jefi Cbri/f, that te/rink- led the Altar with his Blood SE/EN timse, and all Things were perfeted the Sventh Day. The Pytiagriaw called it, The Akot or Tie of Man's Life. And so doth 'ltl in Sani, Scpiiis : And Hippocrater, Lib. de Principiis, faith MA 's Life eon ifleth of the Number of SEVEN. And we all know every Seentb rear compleateth the Aflindary of the Nativity, I could fill two or three Sheets of Paper with Proof of it, but enough.,I Ihall here confine my Pen,,1. To the Signs of Mlifarriag. 2. To the Cu,?e. 3. To the Cure of it. 4. A Word or tiwo of Women's Longiyg. $. Of Children w.ith Hair-li)s.,C H A P. I. Of the Signs of Miarriage. A S for Signs of Miscarriage, they are eafly known by,every Woman with Child, and therefore almost need- less to rehearse. As,,x. The Child dilplaced and fallen down low toward the Mouth of the Womb.,z. The Courses appearing blackilh in Colour, much in Quantity; for throught many Woman have them after they are breeding, yet they are pale in Colour, and they always ihew ill Diet Nature rejeting them as not being fit for the Nourilhment of the Child; but if they come with blacki/h Pains and throws especially the Woman being.far gone with Child, they signify Abortion.,3. When the Breasts, which before were round and full, wax lank, and flag down, for the motl part Abortion follows. Hippocrates faith (but whether or truly or no, I know not) That if a Woman goeth with two Children, a Male and a Female, if the rightBreaft fall, fle lofeth her Male Child; if her left, her Female.,4. If in dangerous Sickness a Woman fall in Labour, fie usually dies and the Child alfb.,s. Redness
5. Rednerfofthe Face, trembling ofthe Body, Palsies in the Head, Paines in the inner parts of the Eyes, if the Terms come down at the fame time, and the Body be troubled with Wind, they are held to foreiew Miscarriages.,But becaue all Things are better known by an Argu- ment a Priory, than an Argument a Po/leriore; by the Cause, and what goes before, than by what follow after, we come to the Cause.,CHAP. IL Of the CaufI of Abortiov. T H E ordinary Cause of Abortion re there.,I. A Weakness or Corruption of the Womb, when it is weakned or offended by viscous, slimy or slippery, phle- matick or watery Humours, that so it cannot retain the Fruit received.,a. Apofthumes or Inflamations of the Womb, hinders it through Pain, that it cannot perform his Office.,3. Being extreamly bound in Body, in forcing to Stool forceth the Child down, which was before much oppressed by the right Gut, being fiHed with hard Dung, therefore Wforatie faith the Difeale efinmus coming upon a Woman with Child commonly caufeth abortion. lenefmus is a Dif- eale when People have great provocation to Stool, yet can do nothing.,4. The Hzmorrhoids or piles many times cause Mif- carmage.,5 For Women are fabjed to Miscarry, by Reafonof the iipplerinefs of their Wombs; and very lean Women, for want ofNourilhment for the Child in it. 6. Bleeding in the time Ihe goes with Child. 7. Strong Purges are very bad, but Vomits worse. 8. Great Colds and Heats, a Bath and a Hot-House, fa- vour not the Child in the Womb; for they heat it so, that it labours to come out where 'tis cooler.,9. Hunger liarves the Child in the Womb; forfeiting by much Meat or Drink firangle it. - o. Outwardly it may be done many ways, as by Falls, Rlows, Anger, Fear, Sorrow, Running, Leaping, Liftings, immoderate Exercise, &c. C-H A P.
CH A P. III. Of preventing Mifa,-riangc. T H E Cure of Abortion is various, not only according to,the Cautfe but also according to the time, whetherbe- fore or after Conception; and indeed the furef Remedy is to prevent it even before the Child be conceived.,I (hall then divide my Rules into two Parts, v/iz. what is to be done.,i. Brfore Z) 2. After S CoHreption. Before Conception. i. Let her firengthen her Body and let her take such Medicines as strengthen her Womb firit, and such as further Conception afterwards; you have enough of them before. Also let her drink Wine wherein Mother of Thyme hath been well boiled; for this is excellent for this use.,z. Either Windiness, or Moiltnefs, or Dryness of the Womb must be the cause of it.,If Windiness, there's no better Remedy under the Moon than eating half a score of Juniper-Berries every Morning.,If Moilfure, let her sweat in a Hot-house, and use her Bo- dy to Exercise. and take half a Dram of Galangal in Powder, mixed in as much Cinnamon, every Morning in Mulkadel.,If dryness of the Womb be the Cause, as many times the Womb wanting Moiflure to futlain the Child is many times the cause of Barrenness; and because it was but briefly hand- led before, I Ihall be large in it here.,It is most incident to young flourishing Women, and such as are cholerick of Complexion, and is known by exceeding Proneness to Venery. It is cured by cold Emulsions made of Barley-water, wherein mix the Seeds of white Poppies, Almonds blanched, the Seeds of Cucumbers (or Cowcumbers as the Vulgar call them) of Melons, Gourds and Citruls, of each half an Ounce, and drink it for their ordinary Drink.,Let her avoid all violent Motion, drinking Wine or Strong Water.,Let her anoint the Reins of her Back with Oil of Night- lhade.,Alfothe Seeds of Mandrakes are said to purge a foul, cool a hot, and moisten a dry Womb; and therefore some,E think.
think Rae/l, CGe. 20. desired them, as knowing the heat and drying of the Body, was the Cause of her Barrenness. And I am the rather induced to beleive such a thing may be true, because such infirmities are moll usual to People of fair Conm plexion. You may take half a Dram at a time bruised in a lite White-wine, neither need you fear the coldness of them; for the Seeds are nothing to cold as the Herb, because they contain in them a vital Spirit, that so they may able to beget their like, which mull needs be hot, because all Generation is perform by Heat, not by Coldness.,Thus much for preventing Miscarriage before Conception. After Conception, which is the second thing I promised, I stall declare to you what hitherto hath been hid from your Eyes.,X. Let a Woman with Child drink a draught of Sage-Ale every Morning; it will do her more good than Ihe is aware of. Let no Man object that Sage provokes Worms, and therefore is more probable to cause Mischiefs, than prevent it; for indeed and in truth ,'one and the fame Medicine by strengthening the part afided may bring forth contrary Es- seis; and therefore Cinnamon though it binds in a Loenefs, yet it provokes the Terms when they were flopped, and flops them when they flow down immediately; nay, I have known r-nau Potaile flop the Bloody-flux in one, and, give another, whose Body was cacochymical, many Stools.,2. If Sins of Abortion appear, the usual way is to lay a Toat fopt in Mu&fadel to her Navel, and many times it doth good, for it is a good Medicine. But to take a little Garden Tanfie, and having bruised it, prinklc it with.Mu&ladel, and apply that to the Navel, is far better.,AIfo Tanfie put in Ale, as you make Sage-Ale, (I know not how to teach you being no Browr) and a Draught drunk every Morning, is a sovereign Remedy for such Women as are subjed to miscarry.,Also I would advise Midwives always to keep a Syrup by them, made with the Juice of Tanfie, clarified and boiled into a Syrup, with twice its Weight in Sugar, that so they may have it in readiness to give a Spoonful or two of it in such Caes. It is a most excellent Medicine, though it be CGlgr Iaf'~-eatr Di/fpefiorj; for the Herb by a Magnetic,Virtue
Virtue draws the Child in the Womb any way, or retains it in its proper Place. The Herb is common to be had, and will save many a Child's Life, and its Mothers also, if used according to these and other Directions that you lhall read before you have read the Book through.,3. There is a Stone they called Lapis Jtites, and by some Lapis Pregnars, or a Stone with Child; I am informed that there are many of them to be had now in Londo. ' I lhall firt describe them, secondly teach you their Use.,i. Of these Stones are four Sorts. The best comies from Af-ic, and is foundin an Eagle'-Ne/; for they fay, the Eagle cannot lay her Eggs without them. It is very little, and easily beaten to Powder: It hath another little one within it; which if you Ihake it you may perceive to rattle, and. therefore 'tis called the Stone with Child. This is thought to be the Female: And tome (and they no small Fools neither) think there is no Sex in Stones; I can- not Rand to dispute the point now, though I hold a Sex both in Stone and Trees.,The Second which they call the Male, comes from Arabia. and hath another hard Stone within it, itself being hard like a Gaul, and difficult to beat to Powder. and is of a reddilh Colour.,The Third comes frbm Cyprus, and is like that which comes from Afric, but only bigger, having Sand and little Stones within it,The Fourth is called Taphinfiys, from the Place whence it comes. ItisfoundinRivers, ColourWhite, informRound, and hath another Stone within it. This is accounted the worsE of all; but as in some things the best is bad; so in this the word is very good.,z. For its Use. This Stone being hung about the Neck of a Woman with Child, so that it touch the Skin, preserves the Child 'in her Body, till the time of her Delivery come: Experience hall prove my Words to be very true; and when youfind them so.,i. Give Glory and Praise to God for it. 2. Admire at his wonderful Work in his Creatures. 3. Know that great is the Ignorance the firl Sin of aldar, hathinvolvedMa~kindin, that we cannot now exatly know,E z the
the Vetues of his Creatures, as he in his Innocency did, ppears by his giving them Names according to their Natures.,. If God begin to manifef himself to you in teaching yoa Knowledge, be thankful for it, and know that if the Day break then the Sun will rife.,I think its needless to forwarn Women of such things as cause Miscarriage- or tell weak Women they mull eat good Viauals, for out of Question they will do it if they can get it; I never.knew any behind-hand in that. I with from my Heart our State would but be so happy to take such a Courie that Women in that Cafc might not want, which they might eafdy do, and it would make them dear in the Eyes of God, and the Nation. Besides, The more Childrens Lives are pre- served, the more Soldiers will be had when they are needed. And let rich People know, and fay I told them of it, that fortheirpoor Neighbours with Child that lack Necessaries, or what (happily) they have a Mind to, they being able to relievethem, and not doing of it, Ihall by the great God of Heaven and Earth, be required another Day at their hands; I have freely in the Presence of God, herein dif- charged my own Duty, without flattering any Body; whoe- ver fails in Duty herein, I cannot help it: I hereby in the Presence of God, acquit my self from the answering for the glood of thofethat are loll this way; rich Women are but Women, look to your selves, Blood hath learned the trick to cry for vengeance ever since Adb&s Days.,CHAP. IV. Of Wcmnu Ligng. 'AS an Appendix to this Book, give me leave to speak a ' Word or two of Womens Longings or Lustings, which is incident to many, if not most Women in time of their go- ing with Child; and it comes fittest into this Place, because many times it caufeth Miscarriage; and in this I can quote but my own Opinion (yet that you thall not find too light, fayou will be pleated but to weigh it in the Ballance of Rea- son) for all the Authors that ever I read, or could get, have spoken of it, atm netqaitam, aet nrfuam, either not at all, or to no Purpose.,The Causes of it I conceive to be one of there two.,1. Payfi-a. 2. P-ognofiical,I. PiScal;
I. Ply/ical? That you may underhand, this I:'pra take notice that the Omnipotent and only wife God having made this World of a composition of Elements, ordered ir not only to maintain it flf, but also to increase and multiplv in a natural way, which is that we call Pisfical; for U.dv in Greek, is Nature; and this is that we call the univerfai Providence of God (for his particular Providence to those whom he hath united to himself by the PerfonofJejyS Chriit is another thing.) The Universal Providence I take Wbe that which the Sons of Wisdom call NATURE, and iheis placed by themolt high God, as Viceroy over the whole World; and therefore as wifely as Ihe can puts off every Hindrance that is an Obfacle to her Work, in Man's begetting his like; the is the Princess of Physicians. And though our College is little, or not at all acquainted with her, W'isdom ha:h commanded all her Children to be obedient to her.,Physically we conclude. That Excess in things which Philofophcrs call not Natural, to be the Cause of WUomens Longings. Things nat Natural aec,I. Meat and Drink 2. Sleeping .ud Iratchings. 3. Fulnefi and Emptiness. 4. Exerci~ and Rre 5. Apfe7ions of te Mind.- Exercise in these, corrupt the things that are Natural, of which one great one is to beget its like (I shall, God affifling' me instruCt you in thefeto the full, in a Trcatife which here- after I intend, viz. hac to prefer.ze your Bodies in Hlealth.) Well then if the Body of the Woman be thus disturbed, of Necessity the Child within her mut be disturbed also; therefore Nature as the Artificer calls for such Food as musl make fitting Blood for the Nourishment or encreafe of the Child. Your Child is nourished by your own Blood, your Blood is bred by your Diet, rectified or marred by your Ex- ercife, Idleness, Sleep or Whatching, &¢. nature fees and knows how to swerve from what is fitting, fIh calls, and calls like a Work-woman for what is requisite either to make up what you want; or to remedy what you hae 'done amiss' by breeding a Nourifihnent for thc Child within: yon, co ntrary to what Diet or Things are not natural, you havi-,E 3 formerly
fxmerly kept, or to (upply your Conception wherein you ubre ben wanting to it; she is a Mifirefs worth ten of the College of Phylicians: I aflure you, I have Come Communi- cation with Dr REASOV, one (in my Opinion) of the wifeftMen, and he told me, it mud needs be as I fay, and proved it to me thus: Those who live idly (as the Gentry and Citizens Wives, that seldom use their Bodies to any Exercise, nnlefs it be playing with their Dogs) and keep not good Di are most pestered with such Longings; Women of goodDiet (if there be any such) and such as mind their Bufsnefs and use Exercise, are leat troubled with them; I hope no Women are so proud as not to be ruled by reason nor so simple but will confess Nature to be a better Work- woman than themfeves. This is my PhjficalReafon.,My Prognotical reason is this. The Wisdom Almighty God has givento Nature is such that it knows before-hand what the Fruit conceived will come to, and many times this way gives warning of it, that so Pa- rents may have time enough if they have but wit enough (for Naturecannot endure Fools) either to prevent orprovide for it.,For Example: t. Many times Women with Child long for things not ac- callomed to be eaten, as Dirt, Sand, i.c. their Children, then seldom live long Why lhould such Parents fix their Aftions so strongly upon such a Child, which Dame rature told them would not live before it was born, and how much causeless Sorrow might have been avoided this Day?,a. Many Women with Child have a Mind to steal things; why may not Nature certify the Parents hereby that the Childs Inclination will be Thieving? And how ought they to pray to God, for their Children, to deliver them from such an evil; as also to give them good Education? for good breeding many times make Men avoid thoie Sins which other Men run into.,I have done; only take notice, that Nature not having her Desire, and she desires nothing but what is needful,) is (perhaps of necellity) is forced to let go the Conception for want of Necefaries, and then the Woman Micfarries, and who can Blame her? The Children of fratl could not make ]ticks, if they had not Straw,,The
The only Remedy for this Infirmity in Woman (for I can- not well call it a Disease) is a Drink, a DecoAtion made of Vine-leaves often, they may make a trong Decoftion of it in time of Year when it may be had. and then boil that De- coaion into a Syrup, and keep it all the Year. How to make Syrups of any kind of Herbs whatioever, you may fee in my EngliJh Phdician, and how to keep them all the Year for your ufl at all times.,C H A P. V. Of Children bornm vith a Hare-Lip. Have but a little to fay to this, but that little may be to the purpose. The Cause of it is well known to be the Mother in the time of her Conception being affrighted with either a sudden starting of an Hare or Coney, or by losing her Longing to eat a piece of such a Creature. This was MizalduJ his Opinion. And I am confident tome Women now living, know this to be true enough, yea too true.,His Prevention is this (for he was an old conceited Man as well as I, though one of the ableit Men of his time) let a Woman flit her Smock at fides like a Shirt when she goes with Child.,Let no Woman despise it because 'tis plain an easy; the Ways of God are all so. 'Tis the Inventions of Men are so difficult that a Woman cannot do her self good, but sei must undo her Husbands also.,To preventand cure all Disease., read my Platerus, Sen. nertis, RiLerius, Riolanm, Bartholinia, Joinl ton, IfTingis, Rulandia, Sandor, Cole, &c.,BOO K. VII. l Bo not here intend to teach Midwives how td perform,their Officc, for that they know already, or at least hould. It being far beside my intent to tell them what they know al- ready, but to inftruft them in what they know-not.,This is that which I lhall speak of. The Labour of a Woman may be'faid to be two fold:,1. Of a Dead Child. a. Of a Living Child. Of each of which in a Seion by itself.,E4 SECT.
SECT. I. Of a Itora Laboaring witb a Dead Child. I N this it is (that I can think of) only requisite,,i. To give you Signs when the Child in the Womb is dead. 2. Means how to bring it away- Firfl, Signs of the Fruit of the Womb being dead are. I. The Breals fuddeny flack, or fall flat, or bag down, hat lfould I provide to feed a dead Creature? faith Dame NATURE.,2. Coldness pofieffeth the Belly of the Mother, especial- ly about the Navel.,3. Her Urine (Anglice, her Piss) is thick, with filthy tinking fettling at the Bottom. 4. No Motion of the Child is perceived; no, though you wet your Hand in warm Water and lay it upon her BeSly, for that's the Way to make the Child flir.,5. Dreams of dead Men trouble her in her Sleep at which she is affrighted.,6. She longs to eat such things as Nature never allotted to be eaten,,7. Her Face looks but scurvily, and wants her usual Mirth. 8. Her Breath finks. 9. When lhe turns herself in her Bed, or rifeth up, the Fruit of her Womb swags that way (if it be not a Solecism to call a dead Child Frait) like a Lump of Lead; and in- deed if the Child be any thing displaced, it will do so, vet if Tanfie be but applied to her Navel, or the Stone .Etites it w.ll remedy it if the Child be alive; but not so if dead.,For Cure or bringing away the dead Child, which is always obnoxious to the Mother that goes with it; a dead Creature being very contrary to the Living, wherein appeared the Tyranny of slezentiui in Firgil.,M2ortua fuit.nam jungebat corfora vi'is, CaGf~ manibumq; ninums at; crilus era. 'Dead BRdie to tg Living hb id place, .Ardj)J'd them Hand in Hand, and face to Fare. I pray be pleased to accept first of this Caution, Befure you ufc no Means to bring it away before you be sure itis dead,left
led you be found little better than Murderers another Day. If you follow my former Rules, you can hardly (if you hiie any wit) miss of the Truth; I mean those in the former Books as well as in this; you ihall find them better than a Candle and a Lanthorn to guide you to the Truth, and you may (if you be wife) find enough in them, and learn enough by them, if not to teach you Wit yet to tell you what Wit you lack, when you are confident your Child is dead (which will never be, if the Rules your God hath de- livered to you by my Pen be but followed) I fay, if you he confident your Child be dead in your Womb; do thus (and I pray give me leave to pass by the vulgar Rules, as tho' I knew them not.),I. Take half a Pint of White-wine and burn it, only ad- ding half an Ounce of Cinnamon to it, burn it with no o- ther Spice; and when they have drunk it; (for it will not do the Deed by looking upon it) if your Pains of Travail come upon you, your Child is dead indeed; if net, your Child may probably be weak or sick; for Children are capable of Sickness even in their Mothers Bellies, but ii. i not dead: tor then if your Child be living, it will refreh it, and give you Ease; Take notice by this (good Women) Cinnamon refrefheth the Child in the Womb, and strengthens it.,_. If the Child proves to be dead indeed, these Herbs are Medicinal boiled in White-wine take as many of them as you can get, and if you can get but one of them it mav do the Deedyou Desire, Dittany, Retony, Penny-royal, Sage, Feathersew, Centuary, Ivy-Leaves, and Berries, &c.,3. Sweet Bazil in Powder, take half a Dram at a time in White-wine.,4. The Privaties anointed with the Juice of Garden Tanfie; or if you please you may take the Herb in summer %-lhen it may be moll plentifully had, and beol e it run up to Flower, and having bruised it well, boil it in Oil till the Juice of it be consumed; if you set it in the Sun after you. have mixed it with Oil, before you boil it, and let it remain there a Month together, it will be stronger: This is an ex- cellent Oil for Midwives always to keep in a readiness for such a Bufinels.,E 5 . The
5. The Stone jEtis held near the Privities, draws away the Child; for itsMagnetick Venue is such, that it draws the Child any way, as readily as the Load-hone draws Iron.,6. Make a strong Decodion of Hyfop with Water, and let the Woman drink it very hot, and it will soon bring away the dead Child. If so sone as ihe is delivered of the dead Child, you suppose any of the after birth be left behind for many times in such Cafes it is rotten, and comes away by Piece-meales, let her continue drinking the fame Decoslion till her Body be cleansed.,7. Takethe Roots ofPolypodium, samp them very well warm them a little, and bind them on to the Soles of her Feet it will quickly bring away the Child whether it be alive or dead.,8. A Decotion made of the Herb Nafterwort, used in like manner as the Decodion of Hyfop, works the fame Efets. To wife Women I have spoken enough, which that ye may all be, read my Plattrus, Senertrus, Rivrius, Rieolatu, Bartboliw, Jobbjon, Vftingus, Rulamus, Sanftor, Cak, cre.,SEC T. II. A Gruid fcr Woren Labouring of Living Childrex. T'HIS I confers is the Basis of this Book, which (that I,may be asplain as I can) I lhall divide into these Chap- ters:,I. What facilitates the Lzbour.,O. f cutting tiLe Na'el-fJring. i. Whifat brings a-cajthe afttr-birth. 4 Certain nerrcejiary ue/lion anf ered.,CHAP. I. h'iat Makte the birth afy. F OR a Caution to this, let me advise all Midwives, i.,Notgive any thing inwardly to haften the Birth, before they know the true time of Birth is at hand; for the want ofobferving this, hath spoiled many a Child, and put the Mother to twice as much pain as needed.,a. Let not the Child be forced away unless an immode- rate Flux of Blood come dome for if such Symptom appear,your
your bes way to save the Woman's Life, is, to force away the Child. I have known some Women, and that of lat' Days, that in such Cafes have fallen into the hands of sieh Creatures, that they had as good have sent for a Butcher to deliver them.,3. I confers it is something hard at sirs, to know when: the true time of the Woman's Labour is; many Women be- ing troubled with Pains so long before their true Labour comes, yea, some many Weeks before; and the Reason why they are so, I conceive to be heat of their Reins. I shall be very willing to help in this what I can therefore confider.,Sir/s, Heat of the reins in the Womb in that Cafe may be known by swelling of their Legs: When Women with Child find their Legs to swell much'; let them take it for granted that their Reins are too hot.,Seondl'y, The cure is to, cool the Reins before thetime with Oil of Poppies, Oil of Violets, or Water-Lillier, by anointing the Reins of their Backs with them; for moes afla- redly such Women whose Reins are over hot, have uflally hard Labour, But above all the Remedies that I know, I commend the Decoaion of Plantain-Leaves and Roots. you may make a firong Decotion of them in Waters, and then having drained and clarafied it with the white of an Egg, boil it into a Syrup with its equal weight of Sugar, and keep it for your own Use, or your Friends.in fucs cafes. 4. I told you before, that the Skins which the Greeks (and our Rabbies from them) call .fmnios and dlinntois, contain the Urine and Sweat of the Child, the Use of which Urine and Sweat is great before, and in Travail. Sirs, Before Travail, by their Means the Child is more easily fullained and born up in the Womb.,Secondly, In the time of Travail (the Birth approaching both these Skies, the Amnios and Allantois, are broken by the vehement ffirring of the Child, so that these Excrements fall down to the neck of the Womb; and this is that Mid-t wives call the Waters, and when they fee that come away, then they fay to them that Rand by, now the Birth is near, And tis very true, and the certaineft Sign that can be; for the Child is no longer able to fubfiftin the Womb after,E 6 those
swbe Skins ar broken, than a naked Man is in a heap of now. -Thee Waters if the Child comes quickly after them faiitae the Labour by making the Paflage slippery; and thefore let no Midwives endeavour with their Nails, nor rY thing else to force Water away. Dame Nature knows -When the truetimeof the Birth is, better than they, and lually retains the Water till that time. On the contrary if the Water by accident break way too long before the Birth, such things as haften Nature, may be safely given or admitted; such are Dittany, Betony, Penny-royal, Juni- per-berries, Red Coral, &c.,2. Feathersew boiled in white Wine and a Draught of it drunk; or, good Women (if they please) may take the Juice of it when it is in Prime (and I thing that is in Maay) which having clarified they may boil into a Syrup with its double weight in Sugar, and so keep it by them all the Year, till such time occasion calls for its Use. My Engli/h Plylcian teacheth you at large,3. Mugworr used in the fame manner worketh the fame Effeat.,4. A Dram of Cinnamon in Powder given inwardly, profits much in this cafe.,5. Tanfie bruised and tied to the Privities, or an Oil of it lo made, and use it as you were taught before,6. The Stone ftitis heldto the Privities, inftanty draws away both Child and After-burden; yea, draws out Womb and all, if you remove it not inflantly, after they are come away, its Magnetic Vertue is such, if you do any Mischief that way, the Fault is not mine, you' are forewarn'd of it, for such is the Vertue, that both Child and Womb follow it as readily as Iron doth the L oad-flone, or the Load-Rone the North-lar.,'. Mfizalda quotes many other Ways. t. AnAfs's or Horse's Hoof being near the Privities. a. A Piece of Red Coral hung near the fame place. 3. A Loadfone held in her let Hand. 4. The Skin a Snake hath caf off, girt about the middle net the Skin.,. Pears being in her C amber, hinder her from being Delivere ih,Eightly,
Eightly, A Decoaion of Savory made in White-wine and drunk, gives speedy Delivery to Women,. .,Ninthly, Another good Remedy to give' speedy Delivery to Women, is this, fTae wild Tan/u or Silver-weed, brajt it and apply it to her Nfrils.,Tenthly, Take Date-fmees and leat them to pcroder, and let her take half a Dram of them in White-W7ne at a Time.,Eleventhly, Take Parney, bruise it and press out the Juice, and dip a Linnen Cloth in it, and put it up (being Ib dipped) into the Mouth of the Womb, it will presently cause the Child to come away, though it be Dead, and not only the Child, but also the After-burden; and not only so, but the Juice ofPariley, especially Stone-parfly, being drunk' by a Woman with Child, cleanfeth not only the Womb, but also the Child in the Wonmb of all gross Humours.,Twelfthly, It is excellent good in such a Cafe to take a Scruple of Calloreum in Powder in any convenient Liquors or two or three drops of Spirit of Caftoreum or eight or nine drops of Spirit of Myrrh given in any convenient Liquor, give speedy Delivery.,Thirteenthly, Give a Woman in such a cafe another Woman's Milk to drink it will cause speedy Delivery -and almost without any Pain. Fourteenthly, the Juice of Leeks being drunk with warm water, hath a mighty Operation to cause speedy Delivery.,Fifteenthly, Take Piony Seeds,. and boat them to Pow- der, and mix the Powder with Oil, with which Oil anoint .the Loins and Privities of a Woman being with Child, it giveth her Deliverance very speedily, and with less pain than can be imagined.,Sixteenthly, Take a Swallow's Nefl, and diflblve it'in Water, drain it, and drink it warm, it gives Delivery with great Speed, and much Ease.,Let Midwives be ruled by me, never to force away a Child unless they are confident it be dead.,Unless the Woman labouring with it, be troubled with an immoderate Flux of Blood, or have Convullions.,Thus (good Women) have I given you my Rules; which *if you please to make Proof of, you shall find as confiant as the Sun in the Firmament, that never fails Without a Mi-,racle
racle. I have not medled with your Callings nor manual Operation, left Ihould discover my Ignorance, like Psrnmio the PbilJ4 ar, who having never seen Battle, undertook to read aMilitary Leaure before /Mlvnialthe bes Soldier in he World. Dam NSATURE was the Mother of what I have written, and it hath been verified by her two Sons Dr. ~5e and Dr. Exprime.,C A P. U. Of c~uting of th Navel-ring. Reat heed and great Care is to be taken about this, which some account but a Trifles yet in performing this Work (which is quickly-done) doth none of the lealt Art and Skill of a Midwife appear. That this may be done with that Prudence which is required, you ought to observe.,t. The Time. 2. Tie Plate. 3. Tie Mamar. 4. The CGafest.,1. TBe Trmte. The TIme is so soen as ever the Infant is come out of the Womb, whether he comes with part of the After-birth, or without it; for sometimes the Child brings into the World a piece of the Awnios upon its Head; and this is that good Women call the Caul, nay, so fottilh they are, to think a Child Born with a Caal on his Head mult need do Wonders ajua cetrarirum et .erum. Nay, so much Vertue remains in the Cad it fell, that it will perform as great Aas as HerC.ule in his twelve Labours, abate me but his fetching Cerberus out of Hell. Whereas ( as I told you ) it is only a piece of the diar. If you find it upon the Child's Head you ihall miss it there ; ifyou miss it upon the Child's Head you may find itthere; And the Reason why some Children come in- to the World with their Brows crowned with it, is Weakness, which is an Argument of hort Life, and such an Argument as seldom fils. Well, then whether the Child come with this or without it, so soon as it hath made its Exit, or is freed fiom its Mother, confider whether the Child be weak or lrong I told you before, that both vital and Natural Spirit com- muniacd by the Mother to the Child by its Navel-firing.,If the
If the Child be weak, gently put back part of the Vital and natural Blood into the Body of the Child by its Navel, for that recruits a weak Child. If the Child be strong you may forbear. Thus you have the time; only this, let me tell you, that many Children that are Born seeming Dead, may be inflantly brought to Life. if good means be used, in which Cafe, take this for one ( you may also use it if the Child be very weak) viz. Crulh out fix or seven Drops of Blood out of the part of the Navel-firing which is cut off, and give it the Child inwardly.,II. The Place. About which Authors make something to do; and our Midwives at present can scarce agree.,The DiRance the Navel-firing Ihould be cut off, from the Child's Body, ,Eia Lib, 4 cap. 3. prescribes to be four Fingers breadth. A wooden DireAion, because Midwives Fingers differ so much in breadth. We will imagine he means four inches, The Ancients jumped generally in that Opinion Mizaldus was in this Point a little critical, and yet an honed Man. and his Criticisms begat Come Errorsin fonm Modem Writers, and in our Midwives at present. Hence. as I sup- poe ) it comes to pass that Midwives (if Spigelim speak truth, or others who are but his Apes ) leave a longer part of the Navel-Rtring of a Male than they do ofa Female, and their supposed Reason is this. Because in Males they would have the Instrument of Generatian long, that so they may not be Cowards in the Sehool of tens. But the Females ,they cut it (horter, and that they think forsooth makes them modeit, and their Privities narrower. This Spigeliw and all our Modern Writers jeer at. His Words translated verhatim are there; 1 su/ji make my self merry 'with this Opinion; for if it 'ver in the Poever of Wirotn to make the Privoities greater cr lefr Ay the act- ting off the Navel-fring, in soher fadnef, all IWomen laloasing 'tith Child, waoula complain of Midwives, and that dejerwtdly too, because they left them not a great part of their Na el-/trisngs 'when they 'ere Born, that so their Prities beiag large thy might la Delivered zeith maro Eae. Thus Spigeli, and all the rel harp upon the fame String.,Mizaldus orders itto be cut long both in Male and Female Children, his Reason is, because the Instruments of Gene.,ration
ration follow the Proportion of it. And therefore if it be cut too short in the Female, it will be a hindrance to her having Children. Tafi/er, a Famous Afironomer affirms the fame thing. Let no Man prattle to me of Impossibilities: If there be not an Harmony in Nature, how can it confil ? If Na- ture formed the whole Child by the Navel firing in the Womb is her wits so far run a wool-gathering, that mhe can do no. thing by it afterwards ? They fay it dies, and therefore is made invalid: when as the Self-conceitednefs of their own Brains makes their Judgment so invalid, that like Efop's Crow. they think themselves to be an Eagle, when 'tis no such matter. Mi'ldus made Dame Nature, They Dr. Igno- a·c, the Basis or Foundation of their Judgments.,Let them tell me a Reason. z. Why the Load-hone draws Iron? z. Why the cutting of Onions make their Eyes run on Water ? I will use no other Argument than one of their own Reasons, if not both to confute themselves. Belides, I will quote you one or two thing more out of llizalah, and all upoa two Premises.,". Ifthe Navel-ring of a Child afterit is cut, be fufiered to touch the Ground, the Child will never hold its Water, neither sleeping nor waking, but will be subjet to an invo- luntary Pilling during its Life.,a. A Peice ofthe Navel-Rring of a Child born about one, so that it touch his Skin ( Mizaldws faith you may were it as a foyle in a Ring ) defends him that wears it, both from the Falling-licknefs and Convulsion; both which I have known and tried, as also the former. He faith further, That it de- fends him from Witches and Devils, which how true it is, let time determine: the Man was hones. and honest Men usually tell the Truth. And if the Rabbies in our times studied the Sympathies of Nature but half so much as they study to get Money, our Physicians would be able, whereas now they are covetous: They miltook Pri.vate for Publicd Good; and that's the Bane of a Common wealth, and the only way they make you and yours, firt Fools, secondly Slaves. But enough of this. III. fTe Manner.,I inreated you before to note whether the Child were weak or ftroug. If the Child be weak. and Born almost Dead, put,back
back ias I told you before) the blood which you Ihall usually find sow back by the Umbilical Vein, and the Vital Spirits, which you shall usually find flow back by the Umbilical Ar- teries; and do it by Degrees to and very gently; for Nature goes soberly to work in what (he doth, and hates Ralhnefs; so ought a Midwife to do, if {he will be her Servant.,So you (hall perceive the Child which seemed like a dead Creature before, instantly to be refrelhed and awaked like a Man out of Sleep. If the Child seem very lusty and fpright- ful, flop the Navel.Rfring'near its Nivel, that so neitherBlood nor Vital Spirits, may retire and that's the way to keep a Child lufly when it is so. The want of Observation of these Rules, destroys many a Child. I have candidly delivered my own Opinions, and what Truth God hath revealed to me herein, and am free from the Blood of all those that through Negle& are loll this way Having premised this, let the Liga- ture or Binding be very firong, neither cut it off very near the Binding leats the Binding unloose: And let Priefis prattle what they will of the Soul, if the Vital Bloed retire back through the Navel. Life will follow itand leave the Soul be- hind to pick Straws. It is the Spirit of Man is the Life there of, and pot only of Man, but of Beasts and Plants. And the Spirit is nought else but the Communication of the God-head to it in a natural way as Ihewed you before. P/a/. 4c 29 , 0o. You need not fear to bind the Navel-firing very hard, be- cause it is void of Sense; and that part of the NavelString which you leave on, falls of its own accord, in a· very-few Days: The whole Course of Nature being now changed in the Child, it having another way ordained to nourili it felt, With what infirument you cut it off, it matters not, provided it be Ihasp, and you do it cleaverly. The Peice of the Navel- firing that falls off, let it not touch the Ground, remembring what before I told you, and you may keep it for those Uses if you please; if not I cannot help it. If you mind your Neighbours good fo-much as I do yodrs you will do it. IV. The Confefnce, or wba fcllstvu the cutting of the,atl.f-Jri'g. The Navel-Rfring being cut offapply a little Cotton or a Lint to the Place to keep it warm, left the Cold enter in the Body of the Child, which it will mooft afiredly do, if,you
you have not bound it hard enough, andif you have, 'tis good to be sure, as the Millar said when he took his Tole twice. The greatelt Evils will certainly follow the coning in of the cold into the Body of the Child that way, when that part of the Navel-firing which you left remaining, is fallen of, it is the usual cultom of Midwives to put a piece of a burnt Ragg to it which we commonly call Tinder, I would rather . advile them to put a little of the Powder of Bole-Armionic to it, becaulf of its drying quality. The Curse of God upon Women for their firt Sin lies more heavily upon them, than it doth upon Beaits; for they licking it with their Tongues, can reduce it into nfch an Orb, as no Air can penetrate. But the firt Woman your great Grand-mother Eve, having of- fended God, her Posterity are forced to crave Help ot her Neighbours in such Cafe, when Beasts arc not.,CHAP. III. _iat brig:s awav ibe Afier-Birth. A S mnch Danger enfies upon a Woman (if not more ),, the Delivery of the Child, than before: It coch not to tBeoats: Authors have written of bringing away tho Aftcr.Birth, and it would make a Man tick to read it. If you take notice of Lapwings whenethey are in figt of otherBirds imagine a Kite or the like (for they hate all Birds of prey ) you 41_4 have more of thm co to help th e m, than you 4hall fee or 4nd within seven Miles of the Place. I never heard norread they paid them for their Afifiance, for I suppose they knew n.o ufc of Money. The Reason is, they love one another, but we our selves. Carar's Moto of the Crow was cxcellent .,Tpcria ondam cedit almijie Corwix, Es .teu nen potut ~ cert. dixit rit. From the Tarpia Steeples top the Crow. Cry'd out, A/l is not u.ell, but 't.will trrw. And ju thusis myVerdictofAuthors. You think you can fee much when you can sec a Tree and not run your head a- gint it in the Da4; 'tis well you can dp so in-the Night: I think it is now aoqt break ofDay; if so, then the Sun Will rti, a then you W d ot give i Doaor ten Shillings,to
to lead you with an *Ignis Fatiw. If you *Jack 'vitb a would know when Day breaks turn your Lantborn, or Face toward, the Eafl, for from thence the I'ill/'vith a Wife-men came. Authors have gotten a f'ifp. rugged way when it comes not as Dr. Conceit,-would have it, I lhall give you my own 0- pinion; if Midwives will force it away, let them pare their Nails sirs; for Mciai ans iad Midives mul not 'epr tpheir Nill too long.,Gentle Means become a wearied Woman befl, churlilh Remedies are allotted for Felons: The Womb is quick, the the After-birth is Dead. Let the Quick expel the Dead. Its dangerous if it be retained (I confbs it) but is their no other way to kill a Dog, but to hand him ? The Dangerof retai- ning itis very great. Being retained, it putrifies. and thence- comes fcarvy Diseases, Fevers, Apolthumes, Convulsions, and other the like Diseases, and usually Death at the tail of them. Authors prescribe Remedies, To many as will ill a Hop-sack Baths, Sufumigations, Peflaries, and whatnot: If ordina- ry Remedies be prepoRerous (if not dangerous) what must we do then Do thus:,i. Delays are dangerous: A Midwife thought so her self, when the Cafe was her own. | z. What brings away the Birth, brings away alW the As. ter-birth. A dead thing will drag whither you pleae, fowill not a living, for that may draw back: I will not now dif- pute the Point, what is dead and what is living, but take it upon the Vulgar Opinion, because I desire not to lead you into doubtful Disputations. My own Rules are real.,1. Use the fame Means you did to bring away the Birth. z. Comfort the Woman, It is more fitting Praftice fopr you, than to fit telling of Goflips Tales.,3- A little white Hellebore in Powder (alioa Sneezing Powder) is a pretty good Remedy.,4. Remember Tanfie, and the Stone AEtiter. 5. The Herb Vervain, either boiled in Wine or a Syrup made with the Juice of it, and its double weight of Sugar (I hope I need not write one thing twice, to bid you clarfie the Juice before you boil it into a Syrup) and a fpoonlf of, two of tha givór doth the Dse4.,* w~~~ ' *6. 1
6. I hope I need not bid you not to terrify Women in that cafe, knowing that they endured pain enough before: If you are Midwives Ihew your selves Women.,7. Feathersew and Mugwort work the fame Esei& that F'er-vain doth ; but my Opinion is not so irongly. If you are wife, here's enough to know any Meaning; if not, you are are unfit to be Midwives.,8. Aleffanders boiled in Wine, and the Wine drunk, is a gallant Remedy to bring it away; so also is fwcet Clhrvil, or sweet Cicely, Angelica-roots and Mailer-wort uled n like manner.,9. The fioak of Mary gold-flowers received up a Wo- man's Privities by a Funnel, brings away easily the After. birth, although the Midwife have let go her hold.,o. If you boil Mugwort in Water till it be very soft, than take it out, and apply it like a Pultis to the Navel of a Wo- man in Travail, it inliantly bringeth away both Birth and After-birth, but you mull speedily take it away fb soon as both Birth and After-birth are come forth, led it draw down he Womb also.,CHAP. IV. crtain Ncq'raryj Stigns i Ansixred. N Truth my Reason in this Chapter is to teach Women more Wit, and if they be but minded to learn, if they be not, I cannot help it.,The Queffions I ihall answer are these: ueft 1. ,'fy fri- tn bingforth 'eith Pain ? Afuw. I told you before ( or I am decel-ed if I did not) That the Senfc of Feeling was not difiributed to the whole Body by the NervesorSinews. The Mouthof theWomb :s so strait, that it must needs be dilated at the time of her Dili- very. The dilating thereof siretcheth the Nerves, thence comes Pain.,Qutei. 2 Js If nm Wmen bring forth 'vith more Pain tien wfiu. Because the Mouthof the Matrix in rome Women, is fller of Nerves then others, as may appear by Anato- wie.,QeACk. 3. Ilj .a Wmow f l/am wd Mi after Travel.,4('W.
Anfwi. The usual Opinion of Midwives is, because the Bones are moved out of their Places. A Tale of a Tub when the Bottom is out. I confess it was the Opinion of Dr. Read and some other good Anatomifls, Thatin the Women's La- bour, the Shear bone, and the Os sacrum part. It is called Osfacrum. not because of any Inherent Holiness in it, accord- ing to Dr. Read, but because of its Bigness; it being the Cuf- tom (as he faith) among the Grracias, tocall great things ho- ly. I think rather the Name is fetched from the Hedrews then the Greets, it being the Bone which the Atlgelthat wreflledwith Jacob touched, caused him to halt upon his Thiegh; and ever after the Jews hath so high an efreem of that Bone, that they eat none of the Flelh which grew up- on it. This by the By. 'Ccok, Colwumbu, and others, are of Opinion, these Bones *open not; the matter is not much, whether they do 6r hot. The Bones are joined together by Cartilages, and the Liga- ments being bedew'd with superfluous Moillure may give way and neither Bones, Cartilages, nor Ligaments are sensible ; therefore this cannot be the Reason. What's the Reason then?,It's this; The Nerves which ( as I told you ) carry the Sense throughout the whole Body, are fretched in Labour, and therefore there mull of Necessity follow Soreness and Lameness, they are reduced to their former State and Order.,Quelt. 4 What's the Reamon tie Navel-firing twisted together, nvt much unlike to a Cord?,.-ncfw. The Vulgar Opinion of Anatomiis is, That the Blocd by that delay, might be the better prepared; A wa- king Dream ! The true Reasons are three.,X. That the Naval-firings might be the ironger; for if a Cord be not the stronger for twisting why is it twifled ?,2. The different Position of the Child in the Womb, The different Form of the Mother, in going, fitting and lying might compress one ofthere Vessels, that so the Vital Spirit could not pass in by the Arteries for quckning the Child; nor the Blood by the Veins for its Nourilhment, nor the U. rine pass in by the Urachos for its Ease which Nature hath molt strangely voided by this twifling of the Vessels.,3. It is a molt wonderful help in the cutting of the Navel- firing; for it tays both Blood and Vital Spirits from flowing out two hatily aftei the Birth of the Child. OQeu.
Qret. S. ~W t's tVe Reafwv of thofi Nocet or Knots in the Kd-4h eos the ChiWd. .~w. Another WhimCey Midwives have fcrap'd up con- cering this; for so many of them as they find so many Chil- dren they affirm the Mother will have after that. Neither is this enough, but this Error hath gotten a fort of Attendants; for the knots are not of an equal Distance the one from the other. The long Intervals between the Knots Ihew long In- tervals between Child and Child, and the Ihort the contrary. Those Knots that look. reddish signify Male and the whitiih Females. And all this is as true as the Sea burns; which clear- ly appears, if you confider that Women with in a very few, have the like Number of them in all the Children; nay some- times more in their last Children than in their firit.,The true Reason is, Dame NatIure, like a vigilant Nurse; forms these, that the Blood and Vital Spirit might be kept back from coming too violently upon the Child, that so instead of feeding it sec might not choak it. And thus,Such as would be Ikilful Physicians, let them ltudy there Books of mine, viz. Platerus, Sennertus, Ri'veriu , Riolanus, Barthlifnu, 'Jcbmfon, JVqlixeiv, RJandus, Fterneius, San,lor, Coi, &c.,BOO K. VIII. A Guide for Women in their Lying-In. A ND this hall be divided in two SeAions.,I. Trt Diet Jhe ought to kPeep benfle Lies-ln. 2. How to Remedy the Accidents jhe is Subjeit to at,that time, SECT. I. T is not unknown to moRs good Women, That a Woman may deliver her Body of many Infirmities at such a time. And it is a little unknown to me, that the breathing in of ill Air, and the eating of ill Diet is the Cause of most Infir- mities. For preventing of the one, and remedying of the o- ther; be pleaed to take notice of these few Rules which I hal1 deliver. IB. Jy wa, f CautiO. z. ~ 'way of Inftruiow.,Firfi,
Fir]), If her Body be exceeding weak, keep her not too hot; Extrimity of Heat weakens Nature, and diflolves the Strength.,Secondl, Be ihe weak or firong, let no cold Air come near her at first: For Cold is,,I. An Enemy to the Spermatical Parts. 2. If it get into the Womb, it increases the After-pains 3. Cauleth Swellings in the Womb 4. Hurts the Nerves. Thirdly, Let her Diet be hot, and let her eat but little at a time, Woman many times have apilh Nurses, and they give Reasons jull like themselves, as though they were spit out of their Mouths 0 fay they. rour Belly hath bee much emptied, and you rmuf fil it again; and you have lo a great deal of Blood, a;.d do lfe daily. Andyou nows eati Piudly, and drink profowdly or ekie you well hefo 'Meak, you .will not he abie to hep your flf. Silly Creatures, and good for nothing but to wah liilhes for three half-pence a Day! For the Blood he voids is fuperfuous. / and good tbr nothing but to do Mischief, and hath been kept in her Body a long time: The voiding of it conducing to her Health, and not to her Weakness. And this appears if it be retained, and can by no Means be brought away, grim Death usually looks his Captives pale in the Face; if not Cbronical Diseases ( which some count worse ) are her Companions to her next Child, if not another World.,Fourthl', Another fottilh Opinion that they have. That Oat-meal Caudles purge a Woman in that cae, Virgins that use themselves to eat Oat-meal, are taught by woful Expe- rience that it binds, and that's the Reason they get Geen- ficknels by it. I never knew a bindingthing purge by boiling.,Fifthly, let her the frit three Days (and longer if {he be weak) avoid the light. Her Labour weakens her Eyes exceedingly by a Harmony between the Womb and them. Her Eyes, if they were weak before, may be trengthned at this time.,Sixthy, Let her avoid great Noises and Sadness, together with trouble of Mind: For whether it be most fitting (he {hould be praising God for her Delivery, or troubled about the wagging of a Straw, judge you.,My 1antrusion are thp.,i. So
a. So soon as Ihe is laid in her Bed, let her drink a Draught of burnt White-wine, in which you have melted a Dram of Sprma CGti.,2. The Herb Ver-ann is a most singular Herb for this pur- pose, and grows commonly in every High-way. For through the Remedies of the College of Physicians grow in the Eajl- IMdes, and you mut give" loney for them, the Remedies of God are near at hand, and to be had for gathering; or else he was miftakan, who said, His teker Mercies are over all his WU'rk. The Herb fortifies the Womb so exceedingly, that it will do more in two Days with it, than in two Weeks with- out. It is in its prime in May or June, when if you will ga- ther it, and take the pains to dry it in the St,, you may keep it all the Year. If you do not, it's not my Fault; you may use it any way, boil it in her Meats and Drinks; it hath no ofenfive Taste, though very pleasant Vertues.,3. If the-Woman be any way Feverilh add Plantain to it, whether Leaves or Root it matter not, If the be not Feverish, it will not do amirs to add them both together, Vis anita For, tier, joined Strength is strongest.,4. If her Courses come not away as they (hould do, leave out the Plantain, and instead thereof, put Mother of Thyme.,5S If the Womb be full ( which may be easily perceived by the Impurity of the Blood, it either coming away in gobs or slinking) or you fufpea any of the After-birth to be left behind ( which is a thing may sometimes happen, through the Midwives be never so able ) make her a Drink of Sea- therfew, Mugwort, Penny-royal, Moth-r of Thyme boiled in white-wine and fweetned with Sugar.,6. Panados and New-laid Eggs, is the bell Meat for her at firti, ofwhich let her eat often. and but a little at a time.,7. Let her use Cinnamon in all her Meats and Drinks; for it strengthens the Womb like a Castle fortified with Walls and Bulwarks.,8. Let her flir as little as may be till after the fifth, sixth, or seventh Days after; if the be weak, let her talk as little as may be, for it weakens her. Goflips Tales do Women little good in such a Cafe.,. If she goes not well to Stool, give her a Clyfler made only with the DecoAion of Mallows, and a little red Sugar.,Old
Old Cage Cato prescribes Coleworts to Women in such a Cafe, and took no other Phyfick, neither himfelfnor his Houlhol4 And Cbryfitrppi was so Vai-glorius to write awhole Treatise of them, making them an universal Medicine for the whole Body, and every Disease it is fubje to. But I spake with Dr Experience the other Day, and he told me, they were ex- tream windy; and Dr Reafia who is always in his Company (both of them being the Sons of Dame VNaure) told me win. dy things were extrcam bad for Women in that Cafe.,o. When she hath lain in a Week, orfomething more, let her use such things as close the Womb; Of which, Knot-grafa and Comfry be ar away the Bell; you may if you please addi a little Purging to it, and do your selves no harms put in PO- lypodium, both Leaves and Roots bruised. Our CQllege of Physicians, and so do the Ancients also affirm; that Polypo- diumn of the Oak is to be preferred before all other Polypo- diums whatsoever. I know no other Reason they have for. it, but only because it is more scarce, more dear; and be- caufc more dear; it brings more Money, and that's the Grease makes the Wheels go. You need not alk in what quantity these Herbs mutl be used; they nre so harmless you cannot offend in the Use of them. If you be pleased to uif the Direaions, you to your Admiration, Ihall find the fin- gular Effects of those Infirufions to your own. Health and Comfort, and to my Desire that am the Pen-man of them. They are mot of them my own, if not all; you fhallCearce find any of them in another's Writings. And thus you fee I do not only will you well, but labour to do you good.,SEC T. I1. Hnv to remcdy the A.cc intJ a lacmr is fuje.? rulo ia btr,Ly'rg-r.~ TH E Accidents are these,--,. Tie AftIr-Paias. About the Caufeof which'Authors keep a terrible quarter. They mud fay something, thoughto little purpose. Some- think it to be the thinness, some the thickness, some the sliminess of the Blood, and some the lharpnefs of it. The Opinion of-Hippocrates was, that Women were most trouble with them at the Birth of the firit Child. Cqs; cMntrariiim el,- F Cu0713rr;
·ranm; the good Old Soul was miltaken, Dr. Experie.ce whirpers the contrary into every good Woman's Ears that had more Childreri than one, 1 do not justly know the Cause myself: And yet this I know, that if my former Cau- tions and Inftruaions be observed, they will be either none at all, or very few. If it be not too late to help it (for Women will be wilful as well as Men) boil an Egg soft and pour out the Yolk of it with which mix a spoonful of Cinnamon- water, and let her drink it; and if you mix two Grains of Ambergreafe with it, it will be better. I hold Verain taken before; to be as good as either.,2. 'Tae Onions and boil them oery q'well in Water, then scamp Thm 'eith Oil and Cnnamon, and Seeds, in Pow'irr, spread them :jn a Clotb andapply them to the Region of the Wcmb.,3. Take Bayberries, beat them to a PcAwder, jut the Pc.wder nn a Cbafing Dioh of Coals, and Ict her recei-ve the Smoak of tbm up her Privities.,4. Take Tar and Barr.:s-grea.f, of each equal quantities, lcil t-cm together, and w'hil/t it is ioiling add a little Pidgeons-Dung on it. Spread some of this upon Linnen Cloth and apply it to the Reins of the Back of a Woman that is troubled with Aft-pains and it will speedily give her Ease.,; Let the Woman that is troubled with After-pains, take half a Dram of Bayberries beaten into Powder in a Draught of BMuluadel.,By putting all these together, a Man may gather, that the After-pains proceed from Cold and Wind.,II. Excorioation in th lo'wer part of the Ifmhb. For the Remedy of which, the usual Medicine is Oyl of fveet Almonds; a better Remedy in my Opinion is Oyl of St John's wort, to anoint that Part withal.,III. Sometimes Horoughgreat Draining to bring the Child into the orld, the Woma omaes to be troubled with the H.morrhoids and Piks. For cure of which.,1. Let her use Polypodium bruised and boiled in her Meats and Drinks.,2. Let her be let Blood in the Vein Saphiena. 3. Ta l a Oxion, and baving cut a Hole in the midle of it fill itf/ll f Qyl ra it, atd haing brifi d it altogether, appbj it ew~ to t: Fwrdaw~t. If you think this Medicine be,too
too hot; Take a dozer Snails wvithout Shells, ifou ran get thtm takefo mn.v Shells aid pull thrin out nd ha Eing bruiftdthem 'vith a little 0),O, al/y tkel.j to it .anm.,4. A better than any in my Opinion is: Take as many Icod-lre as you wan get (some Countries call them Sows) bruise them and having mixed themn with a little OjQ, apply them warm to the Place.,S. If (he goes not well to Stool, let her take an Ounce of Caftia Filtula drawn at Night going to Bed; she needs keep no greater Diet after it.,IV. Retention of the Menjfrua's, Which is a thing usually mortal, if not remedied. lippocrates in his Book Do Natura Purri, holds a Woman ought to be purged according to the time that the Child is in Shaping or forming, which is thirty Days in a Male, forty in Female. Sacred Writ, Levitic:.s Chap. 12. delivers these Words; If ie bring forth a Male Child, fe 1hal! continue in dte Blood of her Purification thirty and thrie DayI. If je bring forth a Female Chill, Jie/heallcontinue in tle Blood of hr Purifta- lion three/lore an tfix Dais. I know not how to understand this Scripture, unless it be confined only to Abrahami Houle- hold and their Seed to whom the Ls-'itical Law. was only written as a rule of Prafife: And Experience will teach us that Hippocratcs his Rules were only calculated for'the MAeri- dian of Grerce, and very seldom found Authentick in our Hemisphere. Besides, Women that give their Children fuck themfclves, have them not so long as those that do not. And if that Blood be impure (as I Ihewed before, and as is a- greeable to Reason) then is it not fit a Woman should give her Child fuck very speedily after her Delivery; for if the Blood be impure, how can it breed good Milk? Dirty Wa- te. will make but dirty Pottage: And the retaining of an impure thing, doth the Body harm, That the first Milk of a Woman is naught may appear, becaufethe frft Milk of a Cow is blackifi and turns to Curds and Whey; yetlies not the Curse of God so heavy upon Cattle for the firl Sin of. Man as it doth upon Men and Women.,'Tis an eafie matterto know when a Woman is purged enough in such a safe. If the Work be well done Heealth and Strength followsS if not, Sickness. 
If it be not well done: s. Take such Medinincs as strongly provoke the Terms? you had a Catologue of them before, part of which are Dittany, Bettony, Savory, Penny-royal, Feathersew, Sage, Centaury, Juniper-berries, Piony-roots, &c. If this do not the Deed, in a Day or two, dangerous Effecs are like to follow (if not prevent) therefore.,2. Let her take two or three Spoonfuls of Briony-Water every Morning; you may fnd the Receipt in my Tranflati- on of the London Di.fenfatory. In their firfl Maifer-piecc it was called HIferical-vwater; but in the second (becaute no body lhould know it was the fame (Briony-Water.,3. Gentian-roots beaten into Powder, and a Dram of them take every Morning in Wine, is a moltfingular Reme- dy; and yet in my Opinion.,4. The Roots of Birthworth, either long or round so uscd, and taken as the former, is better than that.,,. 'ake tti t' Piony Seeds, and 6bat them in:o 'very fine Pc'der, and let her Adrnk them in a Draught of hot Carduus Poaet-drinl, and let her sweat after it. If this do not bring them down in the firlt time Ihe takes it, let her take as much more about three Hours after. Make much of these Medi- cines.,V. Overfirwing of the Men,'rua's. Which is easily cured by Comfiy and Knot-grass, so uscd and taken asyoa were inftrued before. For indeed the Rules in the former Seaion being observed, you have no need of these once in an Age.,The Truth is, this Infirmity seldom happens to Women after they are delivered. If it do, besides the former Re- medies,1. Take Sbhpbers-pu-rer either boiled in any cornvenient Liquor, or dried d rod ttn to Pao.d^r, and it vill be an admiraile KRee- dy to lhop tham: For indeed the Herb is especially approrri- ated to the Privities.,a. The leaves and Flowers of Brambles, or either of them being dried and beaten into Powder, and a Dram of them taken every Morning in a Spoonful of red Wine, or in a Decotion of the Leaves of4he fame which perhaps is far,better
better, is an admirable Remedy for immoderate ficwing of the Terms in Women. Such as would be fi:ilful Physicians, let them read the!f Books ot mine, viz. Pltets, Sennertus, Rivius, Riolmtrr Brtholinus, yohn/lso, e .fii;:glzs, &c.,B OOK.- IX. C;' £\ar/?v.g Ch:Ab'en. P R 0 (E M I U M. O H ! What a racket do Authors nf-ke about this! What,thwarting and contradi&ing, not of others only, but of thtinfclves! What Reasons do they bring ! Why a Woman ni:; needs nurlt her own Child? Some extorted from Divi- nity Sarah Nursed IMar therefore every Woman must Nurse her own Child. Why is it not as good an Argument, that because Da.id was a King and a Prophet, therefore eveny Man mul be a King, and every King a Prophet. Sornm they have haled it from Reason by head and boulders. The Mother's Milk is moll convenient for the Child, because the Child participates of her Nature; as though every choleric Woman, had choleric Children, and every melancholly Woman melancholly Children. Or else, because the Wo- man can not love her Child, except ihe give it Tuck herown self, which if ihe do not more inhuman Beat Ihe.,On the other fide: It would make a dying Man thwart all this again.,1. Say they (and they all agree in that Opinion, though the Point bedifputable. ) The Child draws his Conditions from his Nurse, To prove this they quote a great many I'at!lers, otherwise called Heathens. As that the Lacedra- noriicus flet up the youngest Son of their deceased King in his stead. because he fucked his own Mother.,2. That Alcibiades being an Athr.eian mas so strong and valiant, because he fuckeda Spartian Woman.,3. Correius Tacitu flraineth all the wits he had to find out the Reason, why the Germans are such strong boned Men; and the result of his meak out-tired Biains was, because,F they
they fucked their own Mother. Andwhy hadnot Alcitiamie been so, if he had fucked his.,4. If a young Lamb fucka Goat, his Wool will be har- derthan the Wool of other Sheep, and himself fiercer And yet within half a Page further, he faith no Creature will fuck any other than their own Dams Man excepted.,5. All Authors-univerfally describe of what Complexion and Condition a Nurse ought to be. If every Woman that must nurse her own Child, any Complexion must of Necefli- ty serve the turn. My self having buried many of my Chil- dren young, caused me to fix my Thoughts, intently upon this Business.,I. I confidered the Multitude of Children which died in Lordn in their time of their suckling.,2 How many got such inlcperable Diseases by ill Milk, that it could never be clawed off before Dr. Death came and cured thiem.,3. In the third place, I read Authors, such as I had, and such as I could get gave me such bold and contradictory Reasons, as I have recited to you before by way of Exam[lc , that so you may know by a Penny how a Shilling is coined.,4 Then I set my self to fiudy the Result of which I bes- towed upon youas freely as God bestowed upon me. And for ery particular I lhall give you my Realbns.,I divide this Bookinto two Sections. 1. Wt maMur of Creatre a ArNrfe ousht to e. 2. dAbut what Age the Child ought to i wrveanrt,SECT, I. What maner of Greaure a nut,, cugrt to te. A Uthors make a great tir about this, and take ten times,more Pains than needs about Notions, whether Milk , b good or bad. If her Complexion be fitting to make a Nurse, must not her Milk be good? Did you ever fee a Cher- ry-tree bear Crabs ?,Thereis very few (thank the Physicians of our times for it (that are able to know what Complexion aWoman is of when they fee her, and therefore Authors leave as many needless,Rules
Rules as old Lilly did in his Grammar.. I advise every good Woman to chufe a Nurse that is a Sanguine Woman, and my Reason is, because all Childsen in their Minority have tlh.: Complexion predominant; and if you can get such a Womaln, on need not fear Ihe is fquint-ey'd, or larme, or crunmp-fltllder'd, nor yellow Hair, or an ill-favour'd Nose, nor bad firel, nor miflanrcn Body, nor Black-Tceth, and you may remember the old Proverb, cat-renac m ab cis uos De- usiota-jit. Have a care of thole that God hath markcd. You need not queflion ffch a Woman's Milk to be bad, nor her-Nipples neither, unlres some accidental Infirrii-ity have befallen them and in that your Eye will diret you.,I'll sirs of all deci;;be such a Woman to you. _. Give good Cautions. 3. Tell you what Diet she ought to keep.,I Ishll (l-ciLbc i. y l.r Per.-. the Woman; 2, By ber Csi!ditei. She is of a middle Siature, fleihy, but not fatof a inenly. plcal(.lit, chearful Countenance, a ruddy Colour, ver) cleat Yk;i), that you mayTee her Veins through it.,. By her Conditiorn. She loves Company, cannot endure to be alone; not given to Anger, but infinitely to Playing and Singing, Ihe delights much in Children, and therefore the fittelt Nurie for one. To come to the exac Knowledge of what Complexion a Nurse is of, if you please to bestow a little time and pain in reading my Galen'J at of PhyAic, you cannot well err; only I would not have you to think that a Woman can be found exaly of a singular Complexion without the predominancy .f another Complexion now and then intermixed; you fall f:r sooner find a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, than such a Creature. Only let it suffice, that if you cannot find a Woman exatly of that Complexion, take another as near to it as you can.,For CAUTIONS take these: z. Let her not be too poor, for if Ihe wants, so mut the Child.,2. For Age, let her be between twenty and forty, for then the is in her Prime.,3. Let her be well bred; for ill bred Nurses corrupt goad Nature. F 4,4. Let
4- Let her be in health; for her own Sickness infeAs her Milk, and by it the Child.,5. Let her be a prudent Woman, and such a one will be careful of the Child.,6. If it be aJBoy, let the Nurse be such a one whose last Child was a Boy; if a Girl, contrary.,7. Let her not be with Child her self; for so the my tfoil her own, or yours', or both.,To such a Nurse you may put your Child.,Wat Dirt a Nurse ought to keep. If I ihould prescribe her Diet for every Day in the Week, fle would think me Tyrannical. Give me leave to tell,,IfhfatJhe oght to avoAid. I. If er Milk be accidcnt.l ccrrnitcd, z.t'lat .viIt mend it. 1. She ought to avoid all salt Meats, Garlick, Leeks, Onions and Mustard. Exceffivedrinking of Wine, Strong- Beer or Ale; for they trouble the Childs Body, with Cho- ler, Cheese, both new and old, with Melancholy: And all Filh with Flegn.,2. Let her fe her Body to Exercise; if (he have nothing defe to do, let her Dance the Child. Exercise caufeth good Digetion, good Digeltion good Blood, good Blood good Milk, good Milk a thriving Child.,3. Let her never deny her self sleep when {he is sleepy, Iar then &e will quidtly awake when the Child cries. 4 Letthe Airlhe livesin be good. dWantof this is the Reason so few Children live in London, and those few that live, are none of the wifief. Grass and thick Air makes.,i. Fat unwidely Bodies. a. Dull Wits. An Air near the Fens, or near the Sea. makes sickly Bo- dies. Pure and clear Air makes.,I. Nimble Bodies. ' 2. Quick Wits. The Operationof Air to the Body of Man, is as great as Meat and Drink. For it helpeth to engender the Vital and Animal Spirits, which canfeth in a Man. Apprehension, Imagination, Fan- cy, Opinion, Consent, Judgment, Reason, Resolution, Dif-,cerning
cerning, Knowledge, Remembrance, calling to Mind, Mirth, Joy, Hope, Trust, Humanity,Boldnefs, Mercy, Fear, Sadness, Despair, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Mildness, Stub- bornnefs: And indeed, though'the Bulk of the Body be nourished by Food, the Air carries the greatest swing in all the A&ion thereof: For it is the Cause of Life. Health Sickness. Death to Mortals.,c.-Let her shun Difquietnefs of Mind, Anger Vexing, and Grief: For if a Woman did but fee her own Face in a Glafa, when mhe is in such Passions, Afe would hire a Man to- throw Stones at it.,II. Wf hat w i! amend her Mil/k. bing accidentally ccrhipted. t. Firit of all, let her observe the Caution before men- tioned.,z. Let her Diet be good: 3. Herbs that corre,& Milk, are these; If it be too hot; Endive and Succory; Lettuce, Sorrel, Purffane, Plantain.,If too cold; Borage, Bugloss, Vervain, Mother of Thyme Cinnamon; And to be brief,. whatsoever strengthens the Child in the Womb, amends the Milk after the Woman is delivered.,4. Also many Nurses, though otherwise of Complexion good ; enough yet many times they want Milk:,In such Cafe Authors have left some Remedies, viz. i. The Hoof of the Fore sot- of a Cow dried and beaten - to Powder, and a Dram of the Powder taken every Morn- ing in any convenient Liquor, encreafes Milk.,z. The ThiRle which is commonly called our Ladies Thistle, because the Papists thought good to dedicate it to the Blessed Virgin, whether out of a fond Conceit that ihe amended her Milk by it, I know not; yet this I know, few things growing, breed more and better Milk in Nurses than that doth, and that is clearly teflified by the Milk and Veins in it.,3. If the Child De much troubled'with Wind, let the Nurse use Fennel or Fennel-feeds in her Drinks or Broths and the Child ihall ibon find the admirable Benefit of it. 'Be fiudious, and do not think I Ihall live allways to infirut you. This is the way for good Women to keep their Children in,F- ; Health':
Health: The want of Observance of which, lofeth many a Child: And the Physicians neither of our time nor of our Fore-fathers, had either not the Wit, or not the Honefly to dire& you in it. Blame not me for making a long Narrative how a Nurse hould use her Child, and how she Ihould dress its Head. and how lhe ihouldpin it up in Blankets, and when The 'hould hold it out to piss, as many have done be- fore me. Let but my former Rules be observed, and the La- bour of the Woman will be easy. Her lying-in short. Her Children usually maintained in Health and Strength. 1 hope they will not blame me for shortness unless they love noth- ing but !ong things. I desire my Book Ihoeld be for every one's good, and therefore, within the reach of every one's Purie: And reft confident, there is enough in it to imploy the Brains of the wifell Woman breathing, and to do the fillied Good.,SEC T. II. .taiat O'wat time the Cbidh rugbt to ?e weaned. A Punfeual time in all Children cannot be determined,,but the Manner rray. A Word or two of them both, Egeit A4-icar.a prescribes two Years for the Child to fuck. and that's ufualy one to many. If.the Child be weak, it may fuck longer: Milk digests soon, it being concocted by the Nurse: And that's the Reason, many in a Confunlption fwhefe Digestion .s weak) are cured by fucking a Woman's Breafl If the Child be strong andluily (as happily it may be, if my former Rules be observed) a Year is enough in all Conscience for it to fuck. Experience teacheth the Incon- venience of Children's long fucking. Suck being ordained for Children no longer than until they can digest other Food The fondness of Mothers to Children, doth them more Mischief than the Devil himfelfcan do them; one part and not one of the leat ) of which appears in letting them fuck too long. Unnatural Food in their Infancy, and cockering in their Youth will (if it where polible ) make a Devil of a Saint. I know the Grace of God lays hold upon whomsoever he pleafeth, and therefore I cannot give Universal Rules: Yet this I fay, I have known many, and heard of more,,that
that fucked three or four Years, but never knew .ny thing come to good, nor heard of many. I toldyou Milk was ordained for Children no longer than till they could digest other Food. Divide all the Women in Londoo into twenty Parts, and you ihall not find one of the twenty fit to be a Nurse to her own Child, and that for these Reasons:,. Bcctiefe txey give tbemndfuc too log. 2. Bcca/fe they cocker them in their roth. . And that's the Reason why in time. I. Some Mothers are forced to curse ther Children for- Stubbornness and ill Conditions.,2. Some Children serve their Parents like Sauce, because they had no better Education. And,,3. Why so few Citizens Children cometo good, they feed them againlt Nature; they cocker them against Nature and if Nature have nothing to do with then. is it a wonder if they prove Unnatural ?,4. God many times punilheth them with their own Coin. That t'.cir Children either. die young, or live but a few Years, and those very sickly, or are troubled with the Ric- kets, or lame, or decript. What should-they do with others - If they had Better, they would spoil them.,A certain Man of ingenious Breeding and good Wit,. (whose Name I have forgotten) had a Wife whose inlatiahle Desire could no, be satisfied for want of a Boy though sha had many Daughters, beautiful ofPerfonr of excellent Un- dcrlfanding and good Conditions: But a Boy lhe must have or cife the dies. 'To anlier her Diltempers (I cannot fay her Prayers) God gave her a Boy, and he proved a Fool; said her Hufoand to her, Wife, thou waft never contented till thou hadst a Boy, and now thou has, gotton one that will be a Boy all Days of his Life. To Cure all Diseases, read myPiterus, Sennertrs, Riverlis, Riclani , Bartholinus, 7Jcr.)fon, Vefingius, &c.,CO N C LUSION. G OOD Women, I hate for your good, and not for my,own, traced the beginnings of my seif and you. front the Tools whereby we were made. and the Matter we were made of, to what we were, when we were butan Efirrwyri,I have
Ihave inftruaed you in its.Nouriflment and Growth in the Womb: I have given you helps for the Preservation of it: I -have given you Helps to cafe you in your Body of Deli- very, I have given you Orders foi your Body after Delivery. My care hath not been wanting, for the Child during the time it fucks I ha e not been wanting to you, freely to im- part all the Cautions I knew. If Envy oppose me I know I have done well. It was the Speech of the wisest of Men j iAr fi.ir:e, asd iratb is crel: Ba! -ho cartandlbefor Enrv ? Envy is employed against nothing but what is done welt 'Tis the Eldef Child of the Devil, and looks as like him as though it were spit out of his Mouth. 1 am not afraid nor Sahamed to own this work another Dav before the great ebav-ab, and the Lord efsl Cri/ti, and the Hohv igels ? What Knowledge they have given me herein, I have revealed to you, and have not concealed a Tittle. The greatet part of it (if not all) is verified by Experience. If you try it, you shall find it to be true. The Remainder of my Life have I consecrated to the Publick Good I expect no Reward for do- ing my Duty; yet am forced thus to leave the Child newly weaned, to go upon another Physical Employment of Pub- lick Conten:ment. I flall very shortly take him up where 1 left him, and trace him through his Childhood, Youth, Manhood, Old-Age, even of his Grave, where he and I all rei in Hope of a RefurreAion.,Errata non Corrigenda. 0 R J7e.-s, read Truth. F For hard Larguage, read Plain Dealing. Fcr E.;iifCes, read If ant of ire. For Dfi,-:ering /'cnics Miatters, read Encreafe of K.evkdcge, ' For C;yi.g c:t naairji rme, read E£>y. For K.e4sng agcish me, read Ceef jiocfr. For Difiike of ny Scok, read Slave7y. For Neg.'S of my Rules, read Death cf Iafints. For Pratice JuppinRg them, read A.n ig;orant of them. For Flattrc, read I cannot ai7e it. For Brerty of tie Writer, read Ignorance of the Reader. For IW~t of Krswl-dg', read Be Diligent. Por Firairg Fault- with tk e Boo, read lUant of 7Fit; For TradWing nte I hint my Back, read Uant of Horncfy. For Sutra HIes, read Lok up its Gi. AJ," '^.3~
- A.4 Interpretaion of certain crailed Names wbhichyou shall meet w.ith uneplained in this rreatie. A Cceleratr, In plain Engli,, an Hastener, Physically,'tis used in this Treatise, for the Muscles that open the Passage of the Seed and Urine.,Allartois, The kin that holds the Urine of the Child du- ring it abide in the Womb.,.mryos, The inner Skin that compaffeth the Child in the Womb.,Arteries, Proceed from the Heart, are in a continual Moti- on, and by their continual Motion quicken the Body. They carry the Vital Blood to every Part of the Body; their Moti- on is that which is call'd the Pulse; you may fedl it at your Temples, Wrist, Groan, Oc.,Arthrria, Is a Juncture, when the head of the Bone is Lttle which is receiv'd, and the Cavity which receives it, is ffiallow.,Cborisn, Is the outward Skin which comparieth the Child in the Womb.,Clitoris, Is a sinewy part of the Womb. Corpi lVaricofim, Is an interweaving of the Veins and' Arteries, which carry the Vital and Natural Blood to the Stones to make Seed of.,Cremnfjr, Is the Muscle that holds up the Stones. E:a th;-cis, Is a joining when the large Head of one Bone'is received into a deep Cavity of another.,Ere.cr, In plain Engliih a Lifter up, physically the Muf- cle that makes the Yard stand.,Glans, The top of the Yard. Gsr. ofis, Is a joining of the Bone, as a Nail is joined in a Board; and so the Teeth are joined in the jaws.,G'a.vglnofi. Is a joining of the Bone, when the fame Bone receiveth another, and is received by an another.,termonia, Is the Junaure of a Bone by a Line. Memnbrana, Is an internal Skin. Muscle, Is an instrument of voluntary Motion.. Nerve, Is the fame with a Sinew; and this is that by which the Brain adds Sense and Motion to the Body.,Placenta, Is, the proper Name of a Sugar-Cake, Physical- ly, it is used for a Piece of Flelh in the Garment of a Child in the Womb: You may find it in the After-birth. Pr,-,: - * ^
Pradputiim, Is the Fore Iin of the Yard, that which the Jews were commanded to cut off from their Children at eight Days of Age.,Projararts, Are the Kernals which keep the Seed after the Stones have taken the Pains to finish it I cannot but wonder why Men should call an involuntary ihedding of Seed, the running of the Reins, when the Fault is in the Kernels. The Reins are so bulled about the Urine, thatthey regard not the Seed at all.,Superfitation, Is when one Child is conceived after ano- ther is fore-conceived in the Womb.,Sttur;a, Is a joining as the Bones of a Skull are joined; it properly signifies a stitching Srfarcbfs, Is a joining, together by Flelh. Smrnc:raou/, Is a joining together by a Cartilage. Sy-nemerns, Is a joining together by a Ligament. - ja Deferfntia, Are the Vessels which carry the Seed from the Stones to the Seminal Vessels.,Vafa Prrparantia, Are the Velfels which make the Blood fitting to be concoted into Seed, as they carry it to the Stones.,Vera Cava, Is the great Vein which receives the Blood from the Liver, and diltributes it by its Branches to all the Body.,Urachox, Is the Vefltcl which conveys the Urine from the Child in the Womb te the A7llnzotis.,Urrtbra, A common f aflage of the Yard, both for Seed and Urine.,- U-eceri. Are the Vessels that carry the Urine from the Kidneys to the Bladder.,Ifyou meet with any more than these, which are not ex- plained as they were laid down, I am sorry for it. Thele are all I could fee by the help of my Optic Nerves, (whether it were intradmtteido Spedit, or extramittuido RadiM it matters inot much ) I am willing to satisfy all. If I have miffed any, I will latisfie particular Persons firfl, that tell me wherein I have misled; and the World in general at the next Edition.,' THE
127 THE CONTENTS,BOO K. I. T /E Inbtrurents Dedicated to Generatin. Page. .,ProcEr.iunm. ' ibid. Sea. i. The Genitals of Men. g Chap. I. Of the Preparing t'e1l. S Their Names. Their Use. ib Their Number. Their Original. 6 Chap. 2. Of the Corpus Varicofum. ib.,Its Use ib. Its Subflance and Form. 7 Chap 3. Of theTeflices. 8 Their Names. Their Subflance. Their Fosm. ib. Their Muscles. Their Use. 9 Chap. 4. Of tl.e carryinzg 2el.b. ib.,Their Office. TheirOriginal. TheirUfe. . o Chap. 5. Of te femina.Veels. ,, ib.,Their Description. Their Place. ib. Chap. 6. Of the lard. 12,Its Parts. ib. I. Common to all the Body. ib.,i. The Scarf-fin. z. The Skin. ib. 3. The flelhy Skin. 3 2. Proper to itself. i Two Nervous Bodies. 14 2. Septum Lucidam. 3. Urethra. 1 4. For Muscles. 5. The Glans. 6. The Vessels. 16 Sec. 2. Of the Genetals of Ikiomt, ib. Chap. 1. Of the Privy PafDage 17,Its Lips. Its y5frhbe. The Cliterir. ib The Passage of Urine. The Cauncles. 18. The Hymen ib. The Neck of the Womb. 19,Chap. if~
Chap. 2. Of t&b WfIm. 20 -ts Names. Its Parts. t-. TheMouth. z. The Bottom. ib. Its Figure. Its Frame. Its Cavity. 21 Chap. 3. O t.bh Stere. 22,Wherein they uiiTer from Mens. ib. Chap. 4. Of' o.v %e.wail '.V b ' 23,,The preparing Vefels. Wherein they differ from thoe,of Men, and wherein they differ not. ib. The carrying Velels, the lHorns. 24 Sec. 3. hi, tow Preirve tri- lnjurment Of Genera/ion,Pure. z2 Chap. t, Of T7,epn~ ct iDi.. ib.,Wherein confider, v. That by a Temperate Diet, is meant, that such an ex- at Quantity of Meat and Drink, should be taken into the Stomach, as it can well Digelt, according to Exercise of,Body. 26 From whence it appears x. That fnch as lead a Itudious Life, ought not to Eat fn much as those that Labou;. ib. z. The Quantity is not the fame to all fort; of People. ib. Different three ways, ib.,1. In refpe& of the Diversity of the Air. i b. z. In respect of the Persons. ib. 3 In refpet of Age. _ 27 z. A greater Quantity may be taken of Meat than c f others i b 2. Confider, That the greatelt DifIici:y lies n find out the,exaA Measure of Diet, ib.,Laid open. i. By shewing the Grounds of the Difficulty. ilb 2. By giving some Remedies to remove it. 2 3. Confider, That Intemperancein Diet in the.Parents, cau- feth the Death of many of their Children in Infancy. ib Chap. 2. Of ExcrdJe of te Bcdy. :) How Exercicf of the Body of the Parents conduceth,to the Life of the Child. ib. 1. It firs up natural Hear in them. 30' 2. It diltributes the Spirits in the Body. ib. 3. It cleanfeth theBlood of those Fuliginous Vapours which usually offend it. - ib.,.. - BOOK.
BOOK. II. O F the Formation of the Child in the Wonmb. . 31,Proermium ' ib. Sea. I. ' The Phkcal :aj' of Formentaticn of the Child in the,I'omb. 33 Chap. i, Of tie Parts roperto the Child in the Womb. 34 Of tle Umlnatcars, or Na'vel-Veols. ib. I. The Vein. 2. The Arteries.. 3. The Urachos. ib. The Opinion of Authors. 35 Of the Secundine. ib.,The Placenta. The Charion. The .lantoid. 36 The Anntis. 37 Chap. z. The Formation cf the Child in thc Womb. ib.,Womens Testicles, why. 39 Why sometime a Boy, Ibmetimes a Girl is formed. ib. The Order of forming the Child laid down. 41 Chap. 3. Some needful uoftioni about the Forming the Child,,nlfuered. 1. In what Form doth the Child lie in the Womb 4z,A Description of it, 1. According to Hippocraes. ib. 2. According to Coleumb. ib. 3 A Figure inserted out of Spigelius. 43 2. how the Child is nouriihed in the Womb, Authors confuted. , i The Truth asserted. lb. Sea. . . armation of the Childin the A.frlogiaiy a alOd: . 46 What Authors fay concerning the thing. - 48 The Truth of the Business. 49,BOOK. II.. 0 F .wvhat hinders Conception togther evitb its Rmnkes. 53,Se. I. Of Natural Barrennf. Causes. i' b i. Man and Wife of Complexion. ib a. Want of love between Man and Wife. ib 3. LettingVirginsBlood before theirterms comedown. 5 Loss of carnal Copulation.. 5 Cure by, I. Diet. a. Medicines. ib SeA. z. Of Accidental Barrennef.,WhCene.
Whence it proceeds. ES Chap. I. Of the J:;iang of te Micflrua's 59,Its Caures ila Signs I. General. 2. Particular. Its Cure. ib Chap. z. Of tie serfrling of the Mlen1flrua's 6z,W.liat; is, Its Cauf5, s, Cautions. ib Cure. 63 Chs;'. 3- Of te ..r t oe ;:b, 64 Causes, Signs, Cure. ib Chap. 4. Of tr Falig f the liGm. 66 Dekcription, Cause., Signs, Cure. ib Chap. 4. Ofi' tb 7:faimation of the i'orl. 67,Causes, ib Signs, Cure 68 Chap. 6. Of Ifnda;n/e of the Iflm3n. 69 Chap. 7. Of Heat and Drjzits f the it cmb 70 Sea. 3.. Of Barretmefs againfi Nature. 71,Cure of such Barrenness. ib,B OO K. IV. 0 F that Furthers Cpreption. 72,Se& I. How a Wrnma that vwgd ha we C ildrtenho;ald rdtr tr Bod ib In refpe& of Exercfe. ib Moderate Exercise, its Virtues. 7 Immoderate Exercise, its Vices. ib In refpet of reR both moderate and immoderate. ib Inr peA of Difeontent, Reasons againQt it. 74,1. Physical. 2. Divine. ib Se. a. z. edicirt for a Wmas that -noulld hba Childrec. 76,By way of Caution. ib By way of Precept. ib,BOOK. V. A Guide for Waoea ir Carceptioo. ,8,Chap. i. Sign of Cacention, According to Authors. 79 According to Experience. ib Chap. a. 1&lthrr ltie i6cma Ie cs.ci',ed cwith a Sale or a Female. So According to Authors. ib According to Experience. ib,Chap
Chap. 3. Of the Conception of Twins. 81 'he reason why Twins are Conceived 82 XWhethers Twins be conceived at one time or not ib Authors confuted. 83 The Truth alielted. 84 Chap. 4. Of I/':etr a Cild,'n .85,BOOK. VI. C F Mifcarrigc in lime-in. 86,Chap. i. Ssigsf tMia/cariage 87 Chap. 2. Cartsss of A!ij'ariage 88 Chap. 3. Cure cf M3Oiarriage, 89,I, Before Concepion, ib 2, After Conception, 90 Chap, 4, Of Womcns Longing, 92,CGuJes, 1. Physical, 93 2, Prognoftical, 94 Chap, 5, Of Children horn with a Hare-Lip.,Its Cause and Cure,b,B O O K, VII, A Guide for Women in their LaoWr, 9,S ec. I. Of Women Labouring qwith a dea Cbild. Sign that the Child is Dead in the Womb.ib -,Caution.ib Cure or Means to bring it away. .97 Sect. 2. Women Labouring ivitb a LiUing idl, 98 Chap. 1, What mates the Birtb era. ib,Cautions. Medicines. 99 Chap, z, Of cutting of the Naoel-ftring. 102 I, The Time of cutting it, ib II. The Place, 103 III. The Manner of cutting it, 104 IV, What is to follow the cutting or it, lo C hap, 3, What brings awvay the After-birtb, 10o6 Chap, 4, Certain nece]/niy Suefiions anf:ered, 108,i, Why Women bring forth with Pains. ib Why some Women bring forth with more Pain than,others, ib Why Women are so lame and fore after travail, ib,z. What's
4, What's the Reason the Navel-ftring is so twisted toge tbher, 109,What's the Reason of the Knots in the Navel-firing, i lo,B O O K, VIII, A Guidefor Wcwmen in tleir Lying-Al , 110,Sece, I, ifz'at Dieta 'oman ough to fc o vhenc/e /Ies In, ib,x, By way of Caution, ib 2, By way of Inftirution, i Seft, 2. HF.o to rnried the Sccidlets a U',man is /flje to in her LFing-In, 113 3, The After pains, ib z, Excoriations of the Womb, 114 3, Hamorrhoids, ibr 4, Retention of the Terms, ib 5, Overflowing of the Menftrua'a F6 0 F nbnr tig siro 117 - Authors confuted, ib Scf, I, flat m~rar as Creature a urj atgLt to e. 118 .res-ribed i s. By her Person, is3 Detfrie z. By her Conditions, ih Cautions,,Mrs,
- '33 Mrs. Cuil.elcr's Information, Vindication and,Testimony, concerning her Husband's BooKs to be published after his Death. S 0 great are the A/fjiias tvh,'e-.ith our Heavenly Fa-,ther lath kcen pleased to Exercise me hi. ,or Hand-maid, tI'a I hnae not only lioed to fie my dear Husband ( te Stay lnd Solace of my Life) taken rom me but it hath eetn my hard hap alio to fee iis Reputation and len cry. ( which ':ill/ be dear to all Pofierity, for the WORKS he hath 'writ- ten for the cowmon Good oy all Nation ) blemijo'd and eclip- Jeid y the Covetous and unjult Forgeries o/ ore, 'who thoughb he call. bh/elf Nathaniel, is far from being 'a Ifralite in whom there is no Guile, who 'was not content to publij an Hodepodge of undigefled Colleflions andObfervation of my HuEfand's Deeafed under the Tit/e of Culpeper's Last Legacy: But to nuae the Deceit more taking, he jfeeed his Forthead jo far, and brazen'd it so hard, as not to be a- jhamed to Forge t-wo Epistles, one in mine. and the other in my Husband s Name ; of the Penning of which, he nr I ne-jer so much as dreamed. And yet he impudently asser- meth in my Name, That my Husband, laid a severe Injunc- tion on to Publish them for the general Good, after his Decease; and they are his last Experience in Phyfick and Chirurgery. And in the Title of his Book, he said, They are the choicest and mos profitable Secrets, resolved ne- ver to be publilhed till after his Death All , xhich Ex- preJions in the Title and Efi#les, are as sa/le as the Father of Lyes; and every lWrd of them Forged and Feigned. And be kn:nu Cwell enougb, that no dicreat honj I Man, that wva a Friend to my Husband, or to me mould ewer have agreed to such infamous and dihonel Praifei ; and therefore, 1 de. fire all courteous Readers of the Wtritings of my Husbead' to. take notice of this Deceit, and to ajDre themrlve e-tat it rt.e- ,zer enrered into his Head to publh fucb an andigfied GaUli- maufru, under the prom/i*ig and folemm Name .last legacy.
Legacy, ad that whereby he gained his Reputation in the World, as the Impoifor males him Jfeak in his Forged. Epifle. And I deire any indrferent Reader, that hath obbjr. 'red nyf HIJad's lofty' and maf.inne manner of exrefing him- ilf in his Prefaces and Epi/fls Dedicatory, 'whether in Caf e had ken omined or dijfojd to take a fIlem farerwel of' tl.e World, ar tle Forger males him to do: Whether, 1 /ji he qmaod hae domt it in fbch a whining Falhion, and in a Stik of a Ballad-maker as tofa. And now if it pleare Heaven to put a Period to my Life and Studies that I mull bid all things under the Sun farewel: Farewel to my dear Wife and Child, farewel Arts and Sciences; farewel worthy Glories, adieu Readers. Crtainly my Hus- band Itwld bhae teen far more firious and material, in such a fo/lt ValediAions he could pofily forget his v'onted ref- ped to the College of Do&ors to ,whom he did fa frenent- by addref hirmfif in divers of his Writings. Courteous Reader, ]hail fay no more touching the abuse tf the BkfJller r; oanl prevent as much as concerns me their ' airg at red r th r tr,, frh F i hat my; Hujband left fsven- ty-nrrc Boos of his o.wn mairng or tranjating in ny Hand, and I ha-ve difofed them into the Hands of his, and my smuch tmoured Friend Mr. Peter Cole, Bookjeller at the Printing- Press near the Royal Exchange, for the good of my Child from stlm thut nayefrd cxfe to receive in Print such of them as fraU he thought fit to er-ve thee, in due Season, wcithout any Difguij or Forgries, uatto .'hich I do hereby gi.ve my At- ftlfatisn. .il/i myr Hudhand left feventeec Bsok compleatly per- festd in the .r/ds of the said Mr. Cole, for which he paid my H;Jiand in his Life-time. And Mlr Cole, is ready and zviliing on any god Occasion, toje-w any of the feventy-niue ooEs, or the Jr-ei.teen, to fich as doubt thereof A:d if anr Psrfon/ball quefion the Trutrh of this Vindica- tion or Epitle ; if they will take the Pains to come to me, I will Face to Face jinify tbhe Trth of every Word thvrof, as I have fbfecribed my band thereunto in the Prtilf -.f may. ' Iines. . . . L i'.e^t'/r_
I prose/ in the Prefenct of tbe great God, the Searcher as all Hearts, before' .homn Mr. Brooks and I mufl one Diq giwe an .ecormt of all our dlions, That I bave not Puhlk/- ed this Epifle or iVindication, out of any difreafed to Mr. Brooks; /fr 1 much ,-re/pe the Man, and eould be glad to,Ariv him io my Povwer, hut only to clear my Hufbatd from the Folly and Weakness call upon him ty the Meas above ex- prejid , And out of Tedernnefs to Mr. Brooks, IfrflI tried other Means of keeping, and afterward of repairing my Husband's Credit, and then said long to fee if he would repair in any Afterlife, the Wrong done to my Husband and myself. I desire to be,Your Servant (in, and for the Truth),Alice Culpeper. From my House next,Door to the Red-Lion in Spittle--Fields, October 18 1655.
